TECHNICAL SERVICE CONTRACT
FOR THE RUMAILA OIL FIELD
BETWEEN
SOUTH OIL COMPANY
OF THE REPUBLIC OF IRAQ (SOC)
AND
BP IRAQ NV
AND
PETROCHINA COMPANY LIMITED
AND
OIL MARKETING COMPANY
OF THE REPUBLIC OF IRAQ (SOMO)

TECHNICAL SERVICE CONTRACT
FOR THE RUMAILA OIL FIELD

TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE 1 - DEFINITIONS
3
10
ARTICLE 2 - SCOPE OF CONTRACT
ARTICLE 3 - TERM OF CONTRACT
12
ARTICLE 4 - SIGNATURE BONUS
12
ARTICLE 5 - RELINQUISHMENT
12
ARTICLE 6 - MINIMUM WORK OBLIGATION
12
ARTICLE 7 - SOC'S ASSISTANCE
13
ARTICLE 8 - TERMINATION
15
ARTICLE 9 - CONDUCT OF PETROLEUM OPERATIONS
17
ARTICLE 10 - ASSOCIATED GAS
21
ARTICLE 11 - DEVELOPMENT PLANS AND WORK PROGRAMS
22
ARTICLE 12 - APPROVAL OF DEVELOPMENT PLANS AND WORK PROGRAMS
23
ARTICLE 13 - JOINT MANAGEMENT OF PETROLEUM OPERATIONS
25
ARTICLE 14 - DATA AND SAMPLES
27
ARTICLE 15 - REPORTS AND RECORDS ..•.....................................................................27
ARTICLE 16 - ACCESS AND INSPECTION
28
ARTICLE 17 - MEASUREMENT, TRANSFER, AND DELIVERY OF CRUDE OIU EXPORT
29
OIL
ARTICLE 18 - VALUATION OF EXPORT OIL
29
ARTICLE 19 - SUPPLEMENTARY FEES AND SERVICE FEES
30
ARTICLE 20 - BOOKS OF ACCOUNT, ACCOUNTING AND AUDIT
34
ARTICLE 21 - EXCHANGE AND CURRENCY CONTROL
35
ARTICLE 22 - TITLE TO ASSETS
36
ARTICLE 23 - TAXES
36
ARTICLE 24- PARTNERSHIP, INDEMNITY AND INSURANCE
37
ARTICLE 25 -IMPORTS AND EXPORTS
38
ARTICLE 26 - EMPLOYMENT, TRAINING, AND TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER
39
ARTICLE 27 - PARTICIPATION
39
ARTICLE 28 - ASSIGNMENT
40
ARTICLE 29 - LAWS AND REGULATIONS
41
ARTICLE 30 - LOCAL GOODS AND SERVICES
41
ARTICLE 31 - FORCE MAJEURE
42
ARTICLE 32 _ ENTIRE AGREEMENT AND AMENDMENTS
43
ARTICLE 33 - CONFIDENTIALITY AND TECHNOLOGY OWNERSHIP
43
ARTICLE 34 - HEADINGS OF ARTICLES
44
ARTICLE 35 - LANGUAGE
44
ARTICLE 36 - CONTRACTOR'S OFFICE IN THE REPUBLIC OF IRAQ
45
ARTICLE 37 - GOVERNING LAW, CONCILIATION AND ARBITRATION
45

i /{/

ARTICLE 38 - NOTiCES..••...............................................................................................47
ARTICLE 39 _ SIGNATURE, RATIFICATION AND EFFECTIVE DATE
47
ARTICLE 40 - WAIVER
47
ARTICLE 41 - PROTECTION OF THE ENViRONMENT
48
ARTICLE 42 - SITE RESTORATION AND DECOMMISSIONING
51
ARTICLE 43 - GENERAL BUSINESS ETHiCS......•............................................................52
ANNEX A - DESCRIPTION OF CONTRACT AREA
54
ANNEX B - MAP OF CONTRACT AREA
56
ANNEX C - ACCOUNTING PROCEDURE
58
ANNEX D - DEFINITION OF RESERVOIRS
70
ANNEX E - MINIMUM WORK OBLIGATION
71
ANNEX F - FORMS OF GUARANTEE
72
ADDENDUM ONE - HEADS OF JOINT OPERATING AGREEMENT
76
ADDENDUM TWO - HEADS OF CRUDE OIL TRANSFER AGREEMENT
81
ADDENDUM THREE - HEADS OF AGREEMENT FOR ESTABLISHMENT OF THE FIELD
85
OPERATING DIVISION (FOD)
ADDENDUM FOUR - HEADS OF EXPORT OIL SALES AGREEMENT •...•...•...•...•..

i A/

set out, it is agreed as follows:
ARTICLE 1 - DEFINITIONS
Except as specifically provided otherwise herein, any reference to an Article, Annex or
Addendum shall be construed as reference to an Article, Annex or Addendum of this Contract.
In this Contract, including its Annexes and Addenda, words in the singular include the plural and
vice versa and except where the context otherwise requires, the following terms shall have the
meanings set out as follows:
1.1

"Accounting Procedure" means the accounting procedures and requirements set out in
AnnexC.

1.2

"Additional Appraisal Program" means as defined in Article 11.1 (b).

1.3

"Affiliate" in relation to any entity constituting Contractor, means:
(a)

a company which controls such entity, or

(b)

a company which is controlled by such entity, or

(c)

a company which is controlled by a company which controls such entity.

For the purpose of this definition, "control" means the power to dictate and conduct the
policy of a company through the control, directly or indirectly, of more than fifty percent
(50%) of the shares or voting rights in such company. For the purposes of this Contract,
subsidiaries of SOC as well as companies and enterprises of Iraq's Ministry of Oil or
Iraq National Oil Company (when established) shall be considered as SOC's Affiliates.
1.4

"Appraisal" or "Appraisal Operations" shall include, but not be limited to, such
geological, geophysical, aerial and any other surveys and any interpretation of data
relating thereto and the drilling of such shot-holes, core holes, stratigraphic tests, holes
for the appraisal of Petroleum and other related holes and wells, the production testing
and the purchase or acquisition of such supplies, materials and equipment therefore, as
may be contained in approved Plans and Work Programs.

1.5

"Associated Gas" means Gas, occurring as gas-cap gas, which overlies and is in
contact with crude oil in a reservoir and/or solution gas dissolved in crude oil in a
reservoir.

1.6

"Barrel" means a liquid quantity consistil1g of forty two (42) United States gallons under
a pressure of one (1) atmosphere and a temperature of sixty (60) degrees Fahrenheit.

1.7

"Baseline Production" for any Quarter means the deemed Net Production for the said
Quarter, at the deemed Baseline Production Rate.

1.8

"Baseline Production Rate" for any Quarter constitutes the amount for any Incremental
Production under this Contract in such Quarter, being derived from an assumed decline
from the Initial Production Rate at a compounded annual rate of five percent (5%) as
from the Quarter following the Quarter in which the Effective Date occurs, calculated in
accordance with Article 19.5(c).

1.9

"Best International Petroleum Industry Practices" means all those uses
3

practices that are, at the time in question, generally accepted in the international
petroleum industry as being good, safe, economical, environmentally sound and efficient
in exploring for, developing, producing, processing and transporting Petroleum. They
should reflect standards of service and technology that are either state-of-the-art or
otherwise economically appropriate to the operations in question in respect of new
facilities and should be applied using standards in all matters that are no less rigorous
than those in use by the Companies in other global operations.
1.10

"Budget" means the estimates of the expenditure expected to be incurred for
implementing an approved Work Program for any Calendar Year or part thereof.

1.11

"Calendar Month" or "Month" means, in respect of any Month in a Calendar Year, a
period commencing on the first day of such Month and ending on the last day of the
same Month.

1.12

"Calendar Quarter" or "Quarter" means a period of three consecutive Months
commencing on the first day of January, April, July or October in any Calendar Year.

1.13

"Calendar Year" means a period of twelve (12) consecutive Months commencing with
the first day of January and ending with the last day of December, according to the
Gregorian calendar.

1.14

"Capital Cost" means all costs and expenditures, excluding Operating Cost, related to
Petroleum Operations pursuant to Annex C.

1.15

"Cash Receipts" means as defined in Article 19.5(d).

1.16

"Company" means any entity that is a signatory party to this Contract and that forms
part of the Contractor, excluding the State Partner, and at any time thereafter shall
include their legal successors and permitted assignees.

1.17

"Companies" means, collectively, each Company that comprises the Contractor,
excluding the State Partner, and at any time thereafter shall include their legal
successors and permitted assignees.

1.18

"Contract" means this agreement between the Parties, inclUding the Annexes and
Addenda attached hereto, as amended or supplemented from time to time in
accordance with this Contract.

1.19

"Contract Area" means the Rumaila Oil Field area covered by this Contract; the
coordinates of which are described in Annex A and outlined in Annex B.

1.20

"Contractor" means, on the Effective Date, Companies and State Partner, and at any
time thereafter shall include their legal successors and permitted assignees.

1.21

"Crude Oil" means all hydrocarbons regardless of gravity which are produced and
saved from the Field in the liquid state at an absolute pressure of fourteen decimal six
nine six (14.696) pounds per square inch and a temperature of sixty (60) degrees
Fahrenheit, inclUding asphalt, tar, distillates or condensates obtained from oil-gas
separation facilities within the Contract Area.

1.22

"Data" means as defined in Article 14.2.

4

1.23

"Delivery Measurement Point" or "DMP" means the point, immediately upstream of the
Delivery Point, where the volume and quality of Export Oil that may be lifted by
Contractor under this Contract is measured.

1.24

"Delivery Point" or "DP" means the point(s) where Contractor may lift Export Oil in lieu
of its due and payable Supplementary Fees and Service Fees.

1.25

"Development or Redevelopment Operations" means any and all Petroleum
Operations other than Appraisal and Production Operations, including primary and
subsequent (secondary, tertiary or other) recovery projects and pressure maintenance,
conducted with a view to redeveloping the Field including, but without limitations: the
drilling, deepening, completing, plugging, side-tracking, re-completing and equipping
of evaluation and development wells; the engineering, building and erecting or laying of
production plants and facilities (such as, without limitation, separators, compressors,
generators, pumps and tankage, gathering lines, pipelines, and all facilities required to
be installed for production, pressure maintenance, treatment, storage and transportation
of Petroleum, and loading the same into seagoing tankers); the obtaining of such
materials, equipment, machinery, articles and supplies as may be required or expedient
for the above activities; and all auxiliary operations, activities and services required or
expedient for the better conduct or result of the above activities, all in accordance with
approved Plans and Work Programs and Best International Petroleum Industry
Practices.

1.26

"Development Plan" or "Plan" means a scheduled program and cost estimate
specifying the Development or Redevelopment Operations required for developing
and/or increasing the production capacity of the Field, which includes the Rehabilitation
Plan, Enhanced Redevelopment Plan, and any subsequent Revisions thereof.

1.27

"Dinar" or "IQD" means the Iraqi Dinar.

1.28

"Dollar" or "USD" means the United States Dollar.

1.29

"Effective Date" means the date upon which this Contract becomes ratified and
enforceable as notified by SOC to Contractor in writing in accordance with Article 39
following the agreement by the Parties of the Initial Production Rate.

1.30

"Enhanced Redevelopment Plan" means, pursuant to Article 11.3, the full Field
redevelopment plan, based on all knowledge existing on the Effective Date as well as
additional knowledge derived from the execution of the Rehabilitation Plan; all with the
objective of increased and optimized production and enhanced recovery of Petroleum
from the Field.

1.31

"Expenditure" means as defined in Article 19.5(d).

1.32

"Export Oil" means Crude Oil of standard Iraqi export blend.

1.33

"Export Oil Price" means the price per Barrel of Export Oil Free on Board ("FOB") at
the Delivery Point, determined in accordance with the provisions of Article 18.

1.34

"Field" means the North and South Rumaila Oil Field within the Contract Area as
defined in Annexes A, Band 0, subject to the provisions of Article 5 hereof.

5

1.35

"Field Operating Division" or "FOD" means a non-profit, unincorporated, joint
operating entity, administratively and financially independent of the SOC; established in
accordance with Articles 9.1, 9.10 and Addendum Three, exclusively to serve as
Operator of the Field for conducting Petroleum Operations under the supervision,
direction and management of the Contractor as well as the general supervision and
control of the Joint Management Committee in accordance with the authorities set out in
Article 13.2.

1.36

"Financial Year" means the Calendar Year starting on January 1sl and ending on
sl
December 31 of the same year, both dates being inclusive.

1.37

"Force Majeure" means as defined in Article 31.

1.38

"Gas" means a mixture of hydrocarbons and varying quantities of non-hydrocarbons
that exist either in the gaseous phase or in solution with Crude Oil in natural
underground reservoirs and when produced remain in gaseous phase at atmospheric
conditions of temperature and pressure, and is classified as either "Associated Gas" or
"Non-Associated Gas".

1.39

"Government" means the Government of the Republic of Iraq.

1.40

"Gross Negligence or Wilful Misconduct" means any unjustifiable act or omission, but
not mere negligence, that constitutes an intentional, deliberate, reckless or conscious
disregard of Best International Petroleum Industry Practices or the terms of this
Contract, where such act or omission results in loss, damage or harm by the Senior
Supervisory Personnel of a Party or the FOD.

1.41

"Improved Production Target" means that Net Production Rate in Barrels of Crude Oil
per day defined in Article 2.2(a)(i) measured by the same methodology and the same or
equivalent equipment used for measuring the Initial Production Rate regardless of the
installation of new or improved methods of measurement or equipment.

1.42

"Incremental Production", during a certain period of time, means the incremental
volume of Net Production from the Field during the said period that is realized in excess
of the deemed Net Production volume at the Baseline Production Rate.

1.43

"Incremental Production Rate" in Barrels of Crude Oil per day, means the Incremental
Production of Crude Oil for a certain period of time divided by the number of calendar
days in that period of time.

1.44

"initial Production Rate" means a Net Production Rate which shall be agreed by the
Parties on or before the Effective Date measured in the Field and calculated as the
average daily production rate over a period of thirty (30) consecutive days using a
methodology and measuring equipment agreed by the Parties.

1.45

"Joint Management Committee" or "JMC" means the committee formed pursuant to
Article 13.

1.46

"Law" means any constitution, law, decree, resolution, statute, ordinance, rule, directive,
order, treaty, code or regulation and any injunction or final non-appealable judgment, as
adopted, enacted, issued, promulgated or ratified by the Republic of Iraq or, unless
otherwise provided for herein, as such :Y from, time to time, be amended~ re p

#

1.47

"Lead Contractor" means the Company that is appointed as from the Effective Date as
the representative of Contractor and which is authorized to act on Contractor's behalf in
the conduct of Petroleum Operations.

1.48

"UBOR" or "London Inter-Bank Offered Rate" means the interest rate determined as
the arithmetic average (rounded upward to the nearest one thousandth of a percentage
point) of the offered rates for deposits in Dollars for a period of three (3) Months as
published by the Financial Times (London Edition) on the date which is one (1) business
day prior to the beginning of the said three (3) Months period corresponding to each
interest period. Should the Financial Times rate not be published for a period of seven
(7) consecutive days, the Wall Street Journal (New York Edition) shall be used.

1.49

"Lifting Quarter" means the Quarter during which Export Oil is available for lifting by
Contractor at the Delivery Point under this Contract and Addendum Four, where any
Lifting Quarter shall be the Quarter in which Service Fees and Supplementary Fees are
due and payable.

1.50

"Measurement Point" means the place(s} at which volumes and qualities of Crude Oil
pumped out, received, transmitted or delivered shall be measured, such as the
Production Measurement Point and Delivery Measurement Point.

1.51

"Minimum Expenditure Obligation" means that amount which shall be the minimum
amount to be spent by the Contractor as specified in Article 6.2.

1.52

"Minimum Work Obligation" means the minimum work commitment undertaken by
Contractor under Article 6, and Annex E.

1.53

"Natural Gas Liquids" or "NGL" means the propane and heavier (C3+) components of
natural gas that can be classified according to their vapour pressures as low vapour
pressure (Condensate), intermediate vapour pressure (Natural Gasoline) and high
vapour pressure (LPG).

1.54

"Net Production", over a certain period of time, means all Barrels of Crude Oil actually
produced from the Field over the said period of time, less base sediments and water,
saved, measured at the Production Measurement Point, and received by Transporter at
the Transfer Point.

1.55

"Net Production Rate", in Barrels of Crude Oil per day, means the Net Production of
Crude Oil and NGL for a certain period of time divided by the number of calendar days
in that period of time.

1.56

"Official Selling Price" or "OSP" means SOMO's declared price for each of the Iraqi
crude oil blends.

1.57

"Operating Account" means the account or set of accounts maintained by Contractor
and Operator to record Petroleum Costs and Supplementary Costs.

1.58

"Operating Cost" means recoverable Contractor's costs, expenses, duties, fees, and
charges related to Production Operations pursuant to Annex C.

1.59

"Operator" means the entity designated to conduct Petroleum Operations in
accordance with Article 9, namely the SOC until the FOD takes responsibility for
7

t /11/

Petroleum Operations and thereafter the FOD.
1.60

"Participating Interest" means, in respect of each Contractor's entity. the undivided
share expressed as a percentage as defined in Article 27.1 for such party's participation
in the rights, benefits, privileges, duties, liabilities and obligations of Contractor.

1.61

"Performance Factor", for the purposes of Article 19.5(e), means the ratio of the Net
Production Rate to the bid Plateau Production Target, although in no event shall it
exceed one point zero (1.0).

1.62

"Petroleum" means all hydrocarbons including liquid and gaseous hydrocarbons
produced and saved from the Field under this Contract.

1.63

"Petroleum Costs" means recoverable costs and expenditures incurred and/or
payments made by Contractor in connection with or in relation to the conduct of
Petroleum Operations (except corporate income taxes paid in the Republic of Iraq or as
otherwise stipulated herein) determined in accordance with the provisions of this
Contract, including Annex C.

1.64

"Petroleum Operations" means all Appraisal, Development,
Production Operations, and any other activities related thereto.

1.65

"Plateau Production Period" means a period of seven (7) Years starting with the
earlier of three (3) Years from the approval date of the Enhanced Redevelopment Plan
or the date on which the Plateau Production Target has been achieved for a continuous
period of thirty (30) days, but in no event shall such period commence either earlier than
the approval date of the Enhanced Redevelopment Plan or, subject to Article 12.2, later
than six (6) Years from the Effective Date.

1.66

"Plateau Production Target" means the Net Production Rate that is to be achieved and
sustained for the Plateau Production Period, as bid and as specified in Article 2.2(a)(ii).

1.67

"Production Measurement Point" or "PMP" means the point, immediately upstream of
the Transfer Point within or close to the Contract Area, where the volume and quality of
Net Production is measured.

1.68

"Production Operations" means, in respect of Contractor, any and all operations
related to production of Petroleum, including (but not limited to) workovers, stimulations,
remediation, restoration, operating, staffing, supervising, servicing, repairing,
decommissioning and maintaining of any and all wells, plants, equipment, pipelines,
tank-farms, terminals and all other installations and facilities.

1.69

"Provisional Oil Export Price" means the arithmetic average of SOMO's declared
OSPs for the Delivery Point for the following destinations, the Americas, Europe and the
Far East, for the Month preceding the Month in which the Forward Quantity Statement
under Addendum Four is provided or the preceding Month to such Month if the price is
not available.

1.70

"Rehabilitation Period" means the period starting from the Effective Date and ending
thirty six (36) Months after the approval date of the Rehabilitation Plan.

1.71

"Rehabilitation Plan" means, pursuant to Article 11.1, the plan to be submitted by

8

Redevelopment,

V #/

Contractor, based on existing knowledge of the Field on Effective Date, for the
rehabilitation and improved/optimized production therefrom.
1.72

"R-Factor" is the ratio of cumulative Cash Receipts to cumulative Expenditures in the
conduct of Petroleum Operations as defined in Article 19.5(d).

1.73

"Remedial Program" means as defined in Article 11.1(a).

1.74

"Remuneration Fee" means the fee paid to Contractor for Incremental Production as
calculated pursuant to Article 19.5.

1.75

"Remuneration Fee Bid" or "RFB" means USD two ($2.00) per Barrel of Crude Oil as
bid and as utilized in Article 19.5.

1.76

"Revision", in respect of a Development Plan or Work Program and Budget, has the
meaning given in Articles 12.3 and 12.4, respectively.

1.77

"Senior Supervisory Personnel" means, any individual who functions as its senior
resident manager who directs all operations and activities of such Party in the country or
region in which he is resident, and any manager who directly reports to such senior
resident manager in such country or region, but excluding all managers or supervisors
who are responsible for or in charge of installations or facilities, onsite drilling,
construction or production and related operations, or any other field operations.

1.78

"Service Fees" means those Petroleum Costs and the Remuneration Fee as defined in
Article 19.6.

1.79

"Service Fees Eligibility Date" means the earlier of the end of the Rehabilitation Period
or the date when the Improved Production Target is first achieved over thirty (30)
consecutive days, provided that in no event can this date be earlier than the approval
date of the Rehabilitation Plan.

1.80

"SOMO" means the Iraq State entity, Oil Marketing Company.

1.81

"South Oil Company" or "SOC" means an Iraqi State oil company operating the Field
prior to the Effective Date.

1.82

"State Partner" means SOMO in its capacity as an Iraqi State entity established and
existing under the Law holding a share of Contractor's total Participating Interest as set
out in this Contract.

1.83

"Sub-Contractor" means any company or person contracted by the Contractor and/or
Operator to provide goods or services with respect to Petroleum Operations.

1.84

"Supplementary Costs" means recoverable costs and expenditures incurred by
Contractor, other than those costs defined as Petroleum Costs in Article 19 and as
determined in accordance with the provisions of this Contract.

1.85

"Supplementary Fees" means those Supplementary Costs invoiced by Contractor as
defined in Article 19.3 and Annex C.

1.86

"Tax" means Iraqi corporate income tax pursuant to Article 23.

9

1.87

"Tax Year" means the period of twelve (12) consecutive Months according to the
Gregorian calendar for which tax returns or reports are required according to the Law.

1.88

"Term" means the term of this Contract as defined in Article 3.2.

1.89

"Training, Technology and Scholarship Fund" or "Fund" means the fund established
as defined in Article 26.2.

1.90

"Transfer Point" or "TP" means the inlet flange(s) of the outgoing pipeline(s),
immediately downstream of the Production Measurement Point, where Transporter shall
receive Net Production of Crude Oil from Operator.

1.91

"Transportation Facilities" means the pipelines, pumps, compressors, tanks, meters,
and other transportation facilities for Crude Oil that are built by Contractor beyond the
Transfer Point(s) or as otherwise provided and integrated into the Transportation
System pursuant to this Contract.

1.92

"Transportation System" means, at any time, any and all transportation facilities
beyond the Transfer Point(s) that are operated by or under control of the Transporter.

1.93

"Transporter" means the entity designated by SOC to operate the Transportation
System for transporting Crude Oil beyond the Transfer Point(s) pursuant to Article 17
and Addendum Two; all on behalf of SOC.

1.94

"Voluntary Principles on Security and Human Rights" means the principles relating
to the provision of security with respect for human rights as set out in the web address
www.voluntaryprinciples.org.

1.95

"Work Program" means an itemisation and time schedule of Petroleum Operations.

1.96

"Year" means a period of twelve (12) consecutive Months to the Gregorian calendar,
starting at some date and ending at the anniversary thereof.
(End of Article 1)

ARTICLE 2 - SCOPE OF CONTRACT

2.1

This Contract is a Technical Service Contract for the rehabilitation of improved
production and enhanced recovery of Petroleum from the Rumaila Oil Field in
accordance with the provisions herein. It includes 43 Articles, Annexes A, B, C, 0, E,
and F, and Addenda One, Two, Three, and Four; all attached hereto and made part
hereof. In the event of a conflict between the Contract Articles and the Annexes or
Addenda, the provisions of the Contract Articles shall prevail. Any reference to an
Addendum herein shall be deemed to include the fully-termed agreement which
replaces such Addendum, unless the context requires otherwise.

2.2

Contractor, subject to the provisions of this Contract and in accordance with Best
International Petroleum Industry Practices, shall:
(a)

provide or arrange to perform its obligations set out in this Contract through the
Operator to carry out Petroleum Operations to rehabilitate, to further appraise,

and to re-develop the Field for ::proved production and to carry ou~nhan/#

recovery of Petroleum from the Field in order to achieve the production targets
set out below:

(i)

the Improved Production Target being a Net Production Rate of 10%
above the Initial Production Rate, to be achieved as soon as possible
after the approval date of the Rehabilitation Plan; and

(ii)

the Plateau Production Target at the Net Production Rate of two million
eight hundred and fifty thousand (2,850,000) Barrels of Crude Oil and
NGL per day for the Plateau Production Period. It is understood that the
Plateau Production Target shall only include production from producing
reservoirs as defined in Annex D.

(b)

annually assess and determine the maximum volume of reserves and resources
of Petroleum in the Contract Area;

(c)

provide or arrange to provide all capital, machinery, equipment, technology,
personnel and services necessary to conduct Petroleum Operations through the
Operator;

(d)

incur all costs and expenses required for carrying out Petroleum Operations in
accordance with approved Plans, Work Programs and Budgets in order to
achieve the production levels set out in this Article 2; and

(e)

fulfil all financial and other obligations of Contractor and enjoy all rights and
benefits, in accordance with the provisions of this Contract.

2.3

Discovered but undeveloped reservoirs, as defined in Annex D, may be developed and
produced under this Contract but shall be subject to a separately agreed remuneration
fee which the Parties undertake to, in good faith, agree. If no such agreement is
reached within the period set forth in Article 5, SOC shall be free to develop such
reservoirs in any manner it may deem appropriate, taking care not to hinder or unduly
interfere with Petroleum Operations.

2.4

For a period of six (6) years from the Effective Date Contractor shall have the exclusive
right to negotiate a separate agreement to explore for and develop the undiscovered
potential reservoirs, as defined in Annex D. If no such agreement is reached in this time
period, SOC shall be free to explore and develop such reservoirs in any manner it may
deem appropriate, taking care not to hinder or unduly interfere with Petroleum
Operations.

2.5

In the event of unintentional infringement on the undeveloped or undiscovered
reservoirs, the Parties shall convene to agree in good faith on a proper course of action,
taking into consideration the quantities of petroleum involved, safeguarding the interests
of both Parties.

2.6

At any time, the entities then constituting Contractor shall be jointly and severally liabl~./I)1
to SOC for all obligations of Contractor.
J/
(End of Article 2)

11

V

,j//fP
(

ARTICLE 3 - TERM OF CONTRACT
3.1

This Contract shall come into force on the Effective Date.

3.2

The basic term of this Contract ("Term") shall be twenty (20) Years from the Effective
Date. This Term is extendable pursuant to Article 31 or elsewhere in this Contract.

3.3

No later than one (1) Year prior to this Contract's expiry date, Contractor may submit a
written request to SOC for an extension of the Term for a maximum period of five (5)
Years, subject to newly negotiated terms and conditions.
(End of Article 3)

ARTICLE 4 - SIGNATURE BONUS
4.1

Within thirty (30) days from the Effective Date the Companies shall deposit in cash into
a bank account designated by SOC, their respective pro-rated Participating Interest
share of a signature bonus of five hundred million USD (US$500,000,OOO).

4.2

The signature bonus paid shall be considered Supplementary Costs and shall be
recovered pursuant to and in accordance with Article 19.2(a).
(End of Article 4)

ARTICLE 5 - RELINQUISHMENT
Contractor shall relinquish to SOC, within six (6) Years from the approval date of the Enhanced
Redevelopment Plan, any discovered but undeveloped reservoir(s) not targeted in or for which
Development Operations have not effectively started in accordance with the Enhanced
Redevelopment Plan.
(End of Article 5)
ARTICLE 6 - MINIMUM WORK OBLIGATION
6.1

No later than thirty six (36) Months from the approval of the Rehabilitation Plan and
according to the provisions set out in Annex E, to fulfil the Minimum Work Obligation
specified therein Contractor shall itself or through the Operator prepare or provide the
following activities:
(a)

preparation of the Rehabilitation Plan, Enhanced Redevelopment Plan, and
Revisions;

(b)

conduct of 3-D seismic surveys, including processing and interpretation thereof;

(c)

conduct of detailed geological and reservoir engineering studies, including 3-D
simulation for the reservoirs targeted for enhanced production;

(d)

drilling appraisal and/or development wells with the aim of further Appraisal of
the relevant reservoirs defined in Annex D, and achieving planned production in
12

,/Jil

accordance with the Rehabilitation Plan;
(e)

conduct of detailed laboratory and reservoir engineering studies to evaluate most
suitable secondary and/or enhanced recovery mechanisms for the reservoirs
targeted under the Rehabilitation Plan and Enhanced Redevelopment Plan; and

(f)

performing engineering studies and building/upgrading all necessary surface
installations required under the Rehabilitation Plan, and initiation of engineering
work and infrastructure facilities expected to be incorporated in the Enhanced
Redevelopment Plan.

6.2

Contractor shall spend a minimum amount of three hundred million USD
(US$300,OOO,OOO) in the course of the Operator implementing the Minimum Work
Obligation specified in Annex E. The Minimum Expenditure Obligation shall be deemed
to have been met provided that the Minimum Work Obligations under Annex E are
fulfilled.

6.3

Notwithstanding Article 6.2, Contractor shall invest the sums consistent with the
amounts and timing contemplated in the relevant approved Plans, subject to the terms
and conditions set forth in this Contract.

6.4

The performance of each Company and the fulfilment of its contractual and financial
obligations under this Contract shall be guaranteed by an Affiliate in the form set out in
Annex F where in the case of
(a) BP this shall be BP Exploration Operating Company Limited; and
(b) PetroChina this shall be China National Petroleum Corporation.
Each such guarantee shall be effective as of the Effective Date and must be delivered
to SOC at Contract signing, and as provided in Article 28 in respect of assignees. Any
such guarantee may be called by SOC on notice describing the default and issued to
either Company in accordance with Annex F.

6.5

Ministry of Oil shall provide to Companies a guarantee through an instrument in the
form set out in Annex F, to guarantee the performance of the State Partner,
Transporter, SOC, SOMO and any other Iraqi State company in their fulfillment of their
respective contractual and financial obligations under this Contract. Such guarantee
shall be effective as of the Effective Date and must be delivered to Companies at
Contract signing.

6.6

Substantial failure of Contractor to perform timely the levels of investment and to carry
out the work contemplated in any approved Plan through the Operator shall lead to
Contract termination in accordance with the provisions of Article 8.

(End of Article 6)
ARTICLE 7 - SOC'S ASSISTANCE

The Parties acknowledge that time is of the essence and SOC shall, in good faith, provide or
procure the provisions of any approval, consent or review required under this Contract in a
13

0/ ////

timely manner.

SOC shall:
7.1

provide Contractor with all available pertinent technical data, if any, (in addition to
information provided to Companies during the bidding process) which may become
available from time to time, to be used exclusively for Petroleum Operations;

7.2

provide Contractor with the inventory and equipment in its possession used in
maintaining petroleum operations prior to the Effective Date;

7.3

provide Contractor within thirty (30) days of the Effective Date the available technical
data, not already provided, related to the discovered but undeveloped reservoirs;

7.4

ensure that the Contract Area, including all other areas where Petroleum Operations are
required under this Contract, shall be free of any mines or hazardous war remnants and
free of any claims by third parties. However, in the event that a clearing operation is
deemed necessary by either Party, Contractor shall prepare the respective work
program for discussion with SOC prior to submission to the JMC for approval. Once
such work program is approved by the JMC, Operator shall execute the de-mining work
program through competent service providers and Contractor shall fund the related
costs, which shall be considered as Supplementary Costs and recovered pursuant to
Article 19;

7.5

provide adequate security, through the Iraqi armed forces within the Contract Area and
any other areas in the Republic of Iraq in which Petroleum Operations or operations
related to the Transportation Facilities are conducted including during travel to and from
such areas. SOC shall be solely liable for the conduct of all operations by the Iraqi
armed forces and shall indemnify and hold Contractor harmless in respect of any liability
or obligation due to any loss, damage, fee, compensation to any party for any acts or
activities of the Iraqi armed forces or from being obliged to reimburse SOC for the cost
and expense of providing security as contemplated herein. However, in the event that
the Contractor, in its reasonable opinion and following consultation with SOC, considers
the security provided for its personnel is inconsistent with its HSE policies, Best
International Petroleum Industry Practices or inadequate to allow Petroleum Operations
to be conducted safely and without threat to life, the Parties hereby agree
supplementary measures shall be implemented by Contractor and FOD, as the case
may be including, but not limited to, the engagement of competent private security
providers licensed to operate in the Republic of Iraq, such costs being considered
Petroleum Costs. Such arrangements shall be revised from time to time in response to
changes in security conditions;

7.6

provide assistance, and shall use its best efforts to seek the assistance of and/or
cooperation by any regional, district and/or local government, or other representative,
agency or authority of the Government to Contractor and Operator as may reasonably
be required to secure and renew all entry visas or work permits for employees of
Contractor and Operator or Sub-Contractors and their dependents, all permits and
registrations required for Contractor to open and maintain a branch office in the
Republic of Iraq, all customs and other clearances required for imports and exports of
equipment and supplies required for PetrOleum Operations and assist Contractor and

Operator in obtaining the office space'1~ eqUipment, accommodation, ~munieati/..#

facilities and permits, way-leaves, easements, rights of way, licences and renewals
thereof, all for the purpose of conducting Petroleum Operations;
7.7

7.8

provide Contractor and Operator free of charge:
(a)

access to the Contract Area and to any other areas where Petroleum Operations
are required;

(b)

access to, and use of, water, including water for injection requirements, within or
outside the Contract Area for the purpose of Petroleum Operations, provided that
all installations for off-take, treatment, distribution, and disposal of water shall be
the responsibility of Contractor it being agreed that costs relating to access to,
and use of, water, including water for injection incurred outside the Contract Area
shall be considered Supplementary Costs and recovered pursuant to Article 19.2
(c). The Contractor shall be under no obligation to fund investments related to
quantities of water in excess of those required for Petroleum Operations unless
agreed otherwise;

(c)

use of Petroleum for Petroleum Operations; and

(d)

use of all existing wells and facilities related to the Field within the Contract Area.

In the event of unintentional infringement on Petroleum Operations of either Party, the
Parties shall convene to agree in good faith on a proper course of action, safeguarding
the interests of the Parties.

(End of Article 7)
ARTICLE 8 - TERMINATION

8.1

Termination by SOC
(a)

(b)

SOC may terminate this Contract (i) by giving Contractor written notice if the last
remaining Company (or its parent company that provides a guarantee) becomes
bankrupt or is declared insolvent, or (ii) by giving Contractor three (3) Months
written notice if Contractor commits a breach of a material obligation of this
Contract, including but not limited to:
(i)

Contractor knowingly submits a false statement to SOC which is of
material consideration for the execution of this Contract;

(ii)

the last remaining Company assigns any interest, right or obligation
under this Contract contrary to the provisions of Article 28; and

(iii)

Contractor fails substantially to comply with approved Plans, Work
Programs and Budgets.

If Contractor has remedied its breach pursuant to Article 8.1 (a) within the three
(3) Months' notice period, SOC shall consider the notice as ineffective and
automatically revoked. If SOC reasonably believes that Contractor is doing its
best to remedy the breach and its efforts look promising then SOC shall exten
\d
4
~
~
the notice period accordingly.

A.

15

(c)

If SOC terminates this Contract in accordance with Article 8.1 (a) Contractor
shall:
(i)

forfeit all its future rights and interests under this Contract as from the
date of termination;

(ii)

release SOC from any and all actions, claims, demands and proceedings
that may arise out of such termination other than in respect of a dispute
in relation to such termination; and

(iii)

pay SOC any unspent portion of the Minimum Expenditure Obligation,
otherwise, SOC shall be entitled to recover such balance from Contractor
by any means it may deem proper.

(d)

If Petroleum Operations are suspended or seriously jeopardized for a period
exceeding twelve (12) consecutive Months due to Force Majeure, either SOC or
Contractor may terminate this Contract by giving two (2) Months written notice.
Upon such termination, the provisions of Articles 8.1 (c)(i) and 8.1 (c)(ii) shall
apply, and SOC shall compensate Contractor for accrued but unpaid
Supplementary Fees and Service Fees up to the date of termination.

(e)

If Contractor suspends its obligations in respect of Petroleum Operations by
order or decree of the government of the home country of any of the Companies
or their parent companies, SOC shall have the right to assume full responsibility
for Petroleum Operations in any way it deems appropriate after giving Contractor
one (1) Month written notice to this effect. However, if such suspension
continues for a period exceeding one (1) Year, either Party shall have the right to
terminate this Contract after giving the other Party two (2) Months written notice.
Upon such termination, the provisions of Articles 8.1 (c)(i), 8.1 (c)(ii) and 8.1 (c)(iii)
shall apply and Contractor shall be entitled to no compensation whatsoever.
However, if at any time during the period when Contractor has suspended its
obligations and prior to the end of termination notice, Contractor gives SOC
notice that it is able and willing to resume its obligations toward Petroleum
Operations, SOC and Contractor shall agree on the best course of action to
resume Contractor's obligations and on the payment by SOC of the outstanding
Supplementary Fees and Service Fees that were due and payable to Contractor
prior to the period of suspension. It is understood that Contractor shall not be
entitled to any Supplementary Fees or Service Fees during the period of
suspension.

(f)

Subject to Article 7, if Contractor fails to establish a normal presence in the
Republic of Iraq, as manifested by the necessary personnel and equipment
required to conduct Petroleum Operations within six (6) Months after the
approval date of the Rehabilitation Plan, and in due consideration of Article 31.5,
SOC shall have the right to terminate this Contract after giving Contractor two (2)
Months written notice. Upon such termination, the provisions of Article 8.1 (c)
shall apply and Contractor shall be entitled to no compensation.

(g)

The provisions of this Article 8.1 shall not prejudice Contractor's rights to refer
any dispute in relation to the termination of this Contract to be resolved in
accordance wnh Article 37.

0/

16

,I!JI'/

8.2

8.3

Termination by Contractor:
(a)

If Contractor elects to terminate this Contract before the end of the Term,
Contractor shall give SOC three (3) Months written notice to this effect giving
reasons for such election. If by the end of the said notice period the Parties
have not agreed on a course of action other than termination then Contractor
may terminate this Contract after giving SOC a further written notice of one (1)
Month. Upon such termination the provisions of Article 8.1 (c) shall apply.

(b)

In the event of termination of this Contract (whether by SOC or by Contractor),
in accordance with this Article 8, Contractor hereby warrants that it shall not
obstruct, hinder or otherwise interfere in anyway with Petroleum Operations by
SOC or any third party.

(c)

The provisions of this Article 8.2 shall not prejudice SOC's rights to refer any
dispute in relation to the termination of this Contract to be resolved in
accordance with Article 37.

The provisions of this Contract that by their nature survive termination or expiry of this
Contract (including indemnities, liabilities, audit, confidentiality, governing law and
arbitration) shall remain in full force and effect for a period of three (3) Years after such
termination or expiry.
(End of Article 8)

ARTICLE 9 - CONDUCT OF PETROLEUM OPERATIONS

9.1

The Parties acknowledge that all measures and precautions shall be taken to safeguard
against any possibility of interruption in the ongoing production from the Field as a result
of activities under this Contract. For this purpose and for building upon the long
experience of the existing operating manpower unit in the Field, and for securing the
continuity of the necessary support by SOC, Contractor agrees to the set up of the Field
Operating Division or FaD. The FaD shall inherit the eXisting manpower unit, which
shall be detached from SOC, to conduct Petroleum Operations.

9.2

To guard against any interruption in production from the Field, SOC shall continue to
conduct Petroleum Operations until the FaD is established and takes over the conduct
of Petroleum Operations. As from the Effective Date, SOC shall operate the Field in
close coordination and consultation with Contractor; all under the supervision and
control of the JMC. During the interim period while SOC is continuing to operate the
Field, SOC shall hold Contractor harmless against any loss or damage caused by non­
performance or breach by SOC of Best International Petroleum Industry Practices or the
terms of this Contract. All costs paid by SOC for activities within the Contract Area after
the Effective Date shall be reimbursed by the Contractor. The Contractor shall treat
such reimbursements as Petroleum Costs.

9.3

Should permission be granted to third parties to operate within the Contract Area, such
as for operations that are not related to Petroleum Operations and/or petroleum
operations for the reservoir(s) that are excluded under Article 2.3 or those relinquished
pursuant to Article 5, or for sole-risk operations under Article 12.6, if any, SOC shall take
necessary measures to ensure that such operations within the Contract Area shall not
obstruct, hinder, or unduly interfere with Petroleum Operations. SOC shall indemnify
17

t N

(_

and hold Contractor harmless of any damage, cost, or delay caused by or resulting from
any such third party operations.
9.4

Contractor shall appoint one of the Companies to serve as Lead Contractor. Hence, the
Lead Contractor upon the Effective Date shall be BP. Contractor shall not change the
Lead Contractor without prior written consent of SOC. As from the Effective Date, the
Lead Contractor shall take a substantial role in all planning, decision-making and
activities to ensure the efficient conduct of Petroleum Operations by SOC and shall
represent Contractor in all matters related to the set-up of the FaD, all in accordance
with approved Development Plans, Work Programs and Budgets, and Addendum Three.

9.5

Immediately following the Effective Date the SOC shall deliver to the Contractor and
shall co-operate to refine, and agree no later than thirty (30) days thereafter, an interim
Work Program and Budget capable of lasting until sixty (60) days after the approval of
the Rehabilitation Plan.

9.6

Within thirty (30) days of the Effective Date, the Parties shall jointly commence setting
up the FaD, which shall take over the conduct of Petroleum Operations under the
general supervision and control of the JMC; all in accordance with this Contract,
approved Plans, Work Programs and Budgets, and Addendum Three.

9.7

Promptly following the setting up of the FaD, the Contractor and SOC shall commence
preparation of a plan and procedure for the transfer of direct operatorship from SOC to
FaD, taking into consideration that the transfer plan shall include but not be limited to:
(a)

a list of the various positions to be taken over by the FaD;

(b)

a schedule of transfer stages pursuant to which transfer shall be completed
within twelve (12) Months of the Effective Date;

(c)

inventories of the relevant facilities, equipment, documents, manuals, data and
information necessary for the Petroleum Operations; and

(d)

a list of the activities, facilities and infrastructure that will remain under the direct
management and responsibility of SOC.

9.8

In accordance with the transfer schedule established in Article 9.7(b), SOC shall transfer
to and do all things necessary to allow FaD to operate all facilities and equipment
relating to Petroleum Operations and retain all documents, manuals, data and
information regarding the use and operation of such facilities and equipment so that
FaD personnel are able to manage and handle such facilities and equipment in
accordance with Best International Petroleum Industry Practices applicable on the date
on which such facilities and equipment are transferred. SOC shall keep managing and
funding the common activities and facilities that remain under its direct responsibility, as
per 9.7(d) above, in close coordination and consultation with the FaD.

9.9

The transfer of the accounting and financial aspects shall be handled in accordance with
Article 12 of Annex C attached hereto.

9.10

After the FaD has taken over conduct of Petroleum Operations and has become
Operator and in accordance with the authorities of the Joint Management Committee as
set out in Article 13.2 Contractor shall supervise, direct and manage all the planning,
decisions, surveillance, and day-te>-day ~:nduet of Petroleum Operations by ~ F O ' q

set forth in more detail in Addendum Three. In general, Contractor shall make available
appropriate managerial and technological skills and personnel to the FOD to ensure that
Petroleum Operations can be performed in accordance with Best International
Petroleum Industry Practices. In particular, Contractor shall prepare and submit for
approval the Rehabilitation Plan and Enhanced Redevelopment Plan and their
Revisions, and all annual Work Programs and Budgets and their Revisions. The
establishment of the FOD shall in no way relieve Contractor of its obligations to achieve
the production targets under this Contract.
9.11

It is understood that any commitments entered into by SOC prior to the Effective Date
that cover activity in support of the Minimum Work Obligations shall be funded by
Contractor, which funding shall be Petroleum Costs. However, Contractor shall have the
right to review these commitments and, following consultation with SOC, may request
SOC to terminate such commitments subject to the provision of suitable alternative
arrangements put in place by Contractor or FOD, as the case may be.

9.12

Not later than the twentieth (20th ) day of each Calendar Month, the Operator shall
furnish Contractor with a detailed written estimate of its total cash requirements for the
succeeding Calendar Month expressed in Dollars, in accordance with approved Work
Programs and Budgets.

9.13

Such estimate shall take into consideration any forecast cash balance at Calendar
Month end. Payment by Contractor for the succeeding Calendar Month shall be made
directly to the correspondent bank designated in Article 9.14 below on the first (1 5t) day
of the Month, or the next following working day, if such day is not a working day.

9.14

Each of Operator and Contractor are authorized to keep, at their own disposal, abroad
the foreign funds advanced by Contractor, in an account opened with a first class
international bank. Interest or similar income generated by the account shall be credited
to the account. Withdrawals from said account shall be used to pay for goods and
services abroad and to transfer to a local bank in the Republic of Iraq the required
amounts to meet expenditures in Dinars for the Operator in connection with Petroleum
Operations, converted at the applicable rate of exchange available as published by the
Iraqi Central Bank on the date of conversion. Within sixty (60) days after the end of each
Financial Year, Operator shall submit to the appropriate exchange control authorities in
the Republic of Iraq a statement, duly certified by a recognized firm of independent
auditors, showing the funds credited to the account, the disbursements made out of the
account and the balance outstanding at the end of such Financial Year.

9.15

Operator shall diligently conduct Petroleum Operations in compliance with the Law, and
in accordance with Best International Petroleum Industry Practices.

9.16

Operator's activities aboveground and underground shall be designed to achieve
efficient and safe production of Petroleum. Operator shall ensure that all materials,
equipment, and facilities used in Petroleum Operations comply with generally accepted
engineering norms, are of proper and acceptable construction, and are kept in good
working order throughout the Term. The Parties shall at least one (1) Year before the
expiry of this Contract agree on a detailed procedure for handing-over the Field and
related facilities to SOC as a going concern.

9.17

Operator shall in accordance with the Law and Article 41 take all appropriate and
necessary measures to safeguard the environment and prevent or minimise the effect of
19

~

/1/

any pollution which may result from Petroleum Operations.
9.18

Each of Contractor, SOC and Operator shall take all appropriate and necessary
measures, in accordance with the Law and international standards, to uphold
transparency, accountability, and the strict observance of general business ethics and
anti-corruption laws and regulations. Contractor and Operator shall develop procedures
and guidance documents to secure compliance with the above.

9.19

Operator shall conduct Petroleum Operations in accordance with the provisions of this
Contract, and under the general supervision and control of the JMC.

9.20

Operator shall:
(a)

provide all personnel required for the Petroleum Operations, giving first priority to
Iraqi nationals, provided the Iraqi nationals have the required qualifications and
experience;

(b)

without prejudice to the Contractor's right to occupy positions in FOD, adhere to
employment and training programs which shall aim at the Iraqization of
Operator's manpower pursuant to a plan to be submitted by the Operator and
approved by the JMC; no later than three (3) Years from the Effective Date;

(c)

utilize Sub-Contractors and suppliers of proven capability and professional
experience on competitive basis, and in accordance with the tendering
procedures established pursuant to Article 9.22(c); subject to the provisions of
Article 29, keeping JMC informed accordingly. Any purchase order and sub­
contract shall be in accordance with approved Work Programs and Budgets;
However, prior approval shall be obtained before an award of any individual
purchase order or sub-contract as follows, giving details of bids received and the
basis for recommended award:

(d)
9.21

(i)

by FOD up to or equal to twenty million USD (US$20,OOO,OOO) in value;

(ii)

by JMC if exceeding twenty million USD (US$20,OOO,OOO) and up to or
equal to one hundred million USD (US$100,OOO,000) in value;

(iii)

by SOC if exceeding one hundred million USD (US$100,000,OOO) in
value, where such written approval shall not to be unreasonably withheld,
provided if the total period taken by SOC exceeds forty five (45) days
then approval of any such purchase order or sub-contract is deemed to
have been provided by SOC. If SOC communicates within the specified
period its non-approval of the award in question then the matter shall be
promptly referred to the senior management of the Parties for resolution;
and

prepare and issue reports pursuant to Article 15, and provide any further
information as may reasonably be required by SOC.

Operator shall place fixtures and installations inside and outside the Contract Area, as
shall be necessary to carry out Petroleum Operations, in accordance with the approved
Plans. Fixtures and installations relating to the Transportation System shall be handed
over upon completion and commissioning to the Transporter which will thereafter be
20

/11/

responsible for the operation and maintenance thereof in accordance with the provisions
of Addendum Two and the subsequent Crude Oil Transfer Agreement.
9.22

Promptly after the Effective Date, but not later than six (6) Months thereafter, Contractor
shall prepare and submit for JMC approval, in accordance with Article 12, the following
operating procedures:
(a)

employment procedures and personnel regulations for locally recruited personnel
including scales of salaries, wages, benefits, and all allowances applicable to the
respective grade of staff and employees, together with employment
requirements such as standard job descriptions and qualifications to fill the jobs,
all in accordance with the Law and local market conditions. Salaries and terms of
employment between Iraqis and non-Iraqis of similar qualification and experience
shall be equitably handled; differences being the compensation regulated in the
Contractor's compensation policy, reflecting the home country compensation
level;

(b)

benefits and allowances to be paid in the Republic of Iraq to assigned personnel
referred to in Annex C during the assignment for Petroleum Operations;

(c)

tendering, bidding and contract awarding procedures for engineering, drilling,
construction and other service contracts, and procedures for purchasing
materials and equipment, all on a competitive basis (unless otherwise agreed by
the JMC), taking into account, where applicable, the provisions of this Contract,
Best International Petroleum Industry Practices, and the Law; and

(d)

detailed accounting system to be adopted by Contractor and Operator based on
the provisions of Annex C.
(End of Article 9)

ARTICLE 10 - ASSOCIATED GAS
10.1

Associated Gas shall not be flared except pursuant to the Law, and as provided herein.

10.2

Operator may use, free of charge and on a priority basis, the quantity of Associated Gas
necessary for Petroleum Operations including for re-injection into the reservoir(s) for the
purpose of pressure maintenance, enhanced recovery or temporary storage, and for
power generation.

10.3

All Associated Gas produced from the Field, which is not used in Petroleum Operations
pursuant to Article 10.2 shall be delivered unprocessed to SOC, at the outlet of the
relevant crude oil separators or such other point as Contractor and SOC may agree.
Contractor shall be under no obligation to provide compression or treatment facilities for
Associated Gas, unless otherwise agreed by the Parties in an approved Plan.

10.4

If requested by SOC Contractor shall submit to the JMC, as part of any Plan, a proposal
for economically and technically feasible schemes for the utilisation, and/or disposal of
all the excess Associated Gas not used in Petroleum Operations. Contractor shall be
under no obligation to implement such schemes unless otherwise agreed by the Parties 1

~

in an approved Plan.
21

jJ

,tf/I!P
t

10.5

Quantities of Associated Gas made available to, but not received by SOC, may be
flared. Upon prior consent of SOC, Operator may flare Associated Gas; provided,
however, that the period and volume of Associated Gas flaring shall be kept to the
absolute minimum. Associated Gas may also be flared in limited quantities for testing
and maintenance purposes and in emergency cases.

10.6

If agreed in an approved Plan Contractor shall finance and/or through the Operator build
Transportation Facilities downstream of the delivery point set out in Article 10.3.
Transportation Facilities built by Operator related to the transportation of Associated
Gas beyond the delivery point set out in Article 10.3 shall be handed over upon
completion and commissioning to the relevant Iraqi entity designated by SOC, which
shall thereafter be responsible for the operation and maintenance thereof.

10.7

All costs and expenses incurred by Contractor in connection with the production, re­
injection, treatment, transportation, delivery, and disposal of Associated Gas within the
Contract Area shall be recovered as Petroleum Costs. All costs and expenses incurred
by Contractor in connection with Articles 10.3, 10.4 and 10.6 shall be considered
Supplementary Costs.

10.8

The Natural Gas Liquids (NGL) resulting from infield Associated Gas condensation or
extraction processes, if any, that are delivered to SOC where one Barrel of NGL is
equivalent to one Barrel of Crude Oil for the purposes of Remuneration Fee under
Article 19.5.
(End of Article 10)

ARTICLE 11 - DEVELOPMENT PLANS AND WORK PROGRAMS

11.1

11.2

Promptly after the Effective Date, and in any case not later than six (6) Months
thereafter, Contractor shall prepare and submit for JMC approval the Rehabilitation Plan,
based on the available knowledge of the Field including a detailed Work Program and
Budget for the remainder of the current Calendar Year. While focusing on near-term
Petroleum Operations related to additional Appraisal activities and increased production
from the Field, the said Plan shall also anticipate the overall targets and phases of
redevelopment of the Field for the Term. The Rehabilitation Plan shall particularly
include:
(a)

a "Remedial Program" for the immediate and near-term actions to be taken to
halt any non-optimal operations, to arrest production decline, and to achieve a
sustainable and improved production rate pursuant to Article 2.2(a)(i), all in
accordance with Best International Petroleum Industry Practices; and

(b)

an "Additional Appraisal Program" for the currently producing as well as the
discovered but undeveloped reservoir(s) in the Contract Area which require and
justify further Appraisal works, including a time schedule for geophysical surveys
and any interpretations of data relating thereto, geological and reservoir
engineering studies, as well as laboratory work and Field data gathering
programs. The Additional Appraisal Program is aimed at acquiring technical data
required to conceive the Enhanced Redevelopment Plan.

Contractor shall prepare annual Work Programs and Budgets. inclU{i producti~

22

schedules for the succeeding Calendar Years, not later than the first of October of each
Calendar Year. Each annual Work Program and Budget shall set out in detail by Quarter
all aspects of proposed Petroleum Operations to be carried out including all relevant
data and information, estimated cost, duration of each operation, estimated monthly rate
of production for each reservoir in the Contract Area. Annual Work Programs shall also
include forecasts of yearly activities including costs for the four (4) year period following
the end of the relevant Calendar Year or the period up to the expiry of this Contract
whichever is shorter.
11.3

Within six (6) Months after the completion of the Additional Appraisal Program, but no
later than three (3) Years from Effective Date, Contractor shall submit for approval the
Enhanced Redevelopment Plan, which shall, upon endorsement by SOC, supersede the
Rehabilitation Plan.

11.4

Contractor and Operator each in accordance with their respective roles under the
provisions of this Contract shall conduct Petroleum Operations in a manner that is
designed to achieve the Improved Production Target as soon as possible but no later
than the end of the Rehabilitation Period, and the Plateau Production Target no later
than six (6) Years after the Effective Date. The Enhanced Redevelopment Plan (and any
Revision) submitted by Contractor for approval must contemplate achieving the Plateau
Production Target within the designated time periods.

11.5

Contractor may further prepare and submit for SOC's endorsement Revisions of the
Enhanced Redevelopment Plan as deemed necessary.

11.6

All Plans and production schedules shall be based on sound geological, reservoir,
engineering and economical principles, all in accordance with Best International
Petroleum Industry Practices and with the objective of optimizing production and
maximizing the volume of Petroleum to be produced from the Contract Area.

(End of Article 11)
ARTICLE 12 - APPROVAL OF DEVELOPMENT PLANS AND WORK PROGRAMS
12.1

Following the establishment of the FOD, no Petroleum Operations shall be carried out
unless and until the relevant Work Program and Budget, Plan, or their Revisions have
been duly approved.

12.2

Contractor shall prepare and submit to the JMC in a timely manner its proposals
concerning the Plans, or their Revisions, as well as the associated annual Work
Programs and Budgets, and any administrative, accounting or other operating
procedures, complete with supporting studies, data and information, for approval in
accordance with the following procedure:
(a)

within fourteen (14) days of receiving Contractor's proposal or revised proposal,
in respect of annual Work Programs and Budgets, and any administrative,
accounting or other operating procedures, the JMC shall review and shall either
approve the proposal or return it to Contractor with recommended changes.
Contractor shall, within a further fourteen (14) days of receiving recommended
changes, amend and re-submit the proposal to the JMC for approval;

23

(b)

within twenty (20) days of receiving Contractor's proposal or proposed Revision
in respect of Development Plans the JMC shall review the proposal and pass it to
SOC for endorsement or return to the Contractor with recommended changes.
Contractor shall amend the proposal and re-submit it to the JMC for approval no
later than thirty (30) days thereafter;

(c)

within thirty (30) days of receiving a Development Plan from the ,lMC, the SOC
shall advise Contractor and the JMC of its endorsement or rejection. In the event
of a rejection SOC shall provide written advice as to the reasons for its rejection;

(d)

it is understood that the Parties shall use their best endeavours to expedite the
approval process through close interaction and consultation, and, if necessary,
through the intervention of their senior managements;

(e)

if line items of an annual Work Program or Budget remain unresolved after
submission to senior management the Parties agree that the Operator will be
authorized to act as though the most recent submission by the Contractor has
been approved until such time as final resolution of disputed items has occurred;
and

(f)

time periods in this Article 12.2 shall be subject to appropriate extensions
corresponding to any delay resulting from Force Majeure or as otherwise agreed
between the Parties. In either case, if the total period taken for approval and
endorsement by SOC of the Rehabilitation Plan or the Enhanced
Redevelopment Plan exceeds one hundred and twenty (120) days, then the
Term together with all rights and obligations hereunder shall be extended to
reflect the additional time taken for approvals.

12.3

After the approval of the annual Work Program and Budget by the JMC, it shall be
implemented by Operator under the general supervision and control of the ,'MC in
accordance with the authorities set out in Article 13.2. Operator may make minor
changes to the details of an approved Work Program and Budget, provided, however,
such changes shall not change the buc:lgeted amount for each major line item by more
than ten percent (10%), change the total approved Budget by more than five percent
(5%), or alter the general objectives of the Work Program. Otherwise, the change shall
be considered a Revision of said Work Program or Budget requiring JMC's prior
approval unless such changes are warranted due to emergency or extraordinary
circumstances requiring immediate action, including but not limited to safeguarding lives
or property, protection of the environment or health reasons. Such changes shall be
reported by Operator to the Parties and the JMC within five (5) working days.

12.4

Any modification to an approved Plan that alters its general objectives or changes its
total estimated cost by more than ten percent (10%), shall be considered a Revision of
said Plan and shall be subject to approval in accordance with this Article 12.

12.5

SOC shall have the right to review the proposed or target level of production in respect
of any proposed or approved annual Work Program and may, with reasonable
justification and upon written notification, require Contractor and Operator to increase or
decrease the rate of production from the Contract Area for any of the following reason~.
<a>

to avoid material damage to reservoirs;

24

'A

V p#fff/

(b)

to minimize Associated Gas wastage, provided however SOC shall, at all times,
use best endeavours to take all Associated Gas;

(c)

for safety consideration;

(d)

for operational consideration;

(e)

for Government imposed curtailment; and

(f)

for curtailments due to failure of Transporter to receive Net Production at the
Transfer Point through no fault of Contractor or Operator.

In case reduction of production of Crude Oil is applied as per Articles 12.5(e), SOC shall
apply such reduction in a non-discriminatory manner to all of its and its Affiliates'
production from the Republic of Iraq. Contractor and Operator shall comply with such
reduction upon receipt of notification from SOC to this effect. During the periods when
the rate of production is decreased due to minimising Associated Gas wastage under
Article 12.5(b), production curtailment imposed under Article 12.5(e) or Article 12.5(f),
the Remuneration Fee Bid adjustment under Article 19.5(e) shall cease to apply.
Immediately after such SOC notice of minimizing Associated Gas wastage or production
curtailment the Parties shall agree in good faith a mechanism to fully compensate
Contractor as soon as practicable, which may include, amongst other things, a revised
Field production schedule or an extension to the Term or payment of lost income to
Contractor in respect of the estimated volumes not produced during the period for which
the production levels are decreased under Article 12.5(b) or curtailed under Article
12.5(e) or Article 12.5(f).
12.6

SOC may, at any time, by written notice, request Contractor and Operator to execute
specific works or build specific facilities not included in the currently approved Plan or
Work Program. Within ninety (90) days of receiving such notice, Contractor and
Operator shall amend the relevant Plan or Work Program and Budget accordingly. All
costs associated with the construction and operation of the additional facilities or works
paid for by the Contractor shall be considered Supplementary Costs. If Contractor
decides not to share the possible risks and rewards of such works and facilities in
accordance with this Contract, the expenditure incurred shall be borne by SOC, and the
said works shall be conducted by and for SOC's sole risk and reward.
(End of Article 12)

ARTICLE 13 - JOINT MANAGEMENT OF PETROLEUM OPERATIONS

13.1

The Parties shall establish, within thirty (30) days from the Effective Date, a joint
management committee, referred to herein as the "Joint Management Committee" or
"JMC", for the purpose of general supervision and control of PetrOleum Operations. The
~IMC shall consist of ten (10) members. SOC shall nominate five (5) members, including
the Chairman. Contractor shall nominate five (5) members, including the Deputy
Chairman and the Secretary. The Parties shall also designate one alternate to each of
their members and shall promptly inform each other in writing of any change of the
members or alternates.

13.2

The JMC shall have the following duties and authorities related ~ Petroleu~l

25

Operations:
(a)

review and recommendation of Plans and any Revisions thereof;

(b)

review and approval of annual Work Programs, Budgets and production
schedules, and any Revisions thereof;

(c)

review and approval of operating procedures prepared pursuant to Article 9;

(d)

review and/or approval of the award of sub-contracts and purchase orders as
applicable pursuant to Article 9;

(e)

approval of training programs and Iraqization plans for developing Iraqi
personnel pursuant to Articles 9 and 26;

(f)

supervision and control of the implementation of approved Plans and Work
Programs and the overall policy of Operator in accordance with Article 9.10;

(g)

review and approval of manpower strength and organisation chart of Operator;

(h)

review of Quarterly statements, annual accounts and other financial statements;

(i)

review of periodical and other reports submitted by Contractor or Operator and
issue of comments and recommendations to ensure proper implementation of
Petroleum Operations; and

0)

recommendation of the appointment of the independent international auditor as
per Article 20.

13.3

Decisions of the JMC shall be taken by unanimous vote of the members or their
alternates present at the meeting or by proxy. In the event that the JMC is unable to
reach unanimous decision in respect of any issue, then the issue shall be promptly
referred to the senior management of the Parties for resolution. Quorum shall be at least
three (3) members or alternates of each Party. Decisions taken by the JMC shall be
recorded in official minutes signed by the members present and communicated by
Operator to the Parties.

13.4

The JMC shall meet whenever necessary or expedient for the implementation of this
Contract and at any time a Party requests a meeting to be held. In any event the JMC
shall meet at least four (4) times each Calendar Year. A meeting of the JMC may be
convened by either Party giving not less than twenty (20) days prior written notice to the
other Party or, in a case requiring urgent action, by giving reasonable shorter notice,
with decisions by way of circulated written resolutions. Contractor through the Operator
shall prepare the agenda and necessary documents prior to such meetings and
communicate the same to the members of the .IMC. Either Party may, on seven (7)
days prior notice other than in the case of an urgent action, add any matter related to
Petroleum Operations not listed by Operator to any JMC meeting agenda.

13.5

The JMC may adopt such procedures as it deems appropriate regarding the conduct of
its functions, meetings, and other related matters. For the purpose of facilitating the
conduct of its functions, the .IMC may appoint such appropriate sub-committees as shall
from time to time be required.

til

26

P/

13.6

All costs incurred by Contractor and approved by the JMC for carrying out JMC or sub­
committee duties shall be considered as Petroleum Costs.
(End of Article 13)

ARTICLE 14 - DATA AND SAMPLES
14.1

All original data and samples obtained by Contractor or the Operator shall be the
property of SOC.

14.2

Contractor and Operator shall provide SOC, free of charge, with copies of any and all
data obtained as a result of Petroleum Operations including, but not limited to,
geological, geophysical, geochemical, petrophysical, engineering, well logs, maps,
magnetic tapes, cores, cuttings and production data as well as all interpretative and
derivative data, including reports, analyses, interpretations and evaluation prepared in
respect of Petroleum Operations (hereinafter referred to as "Data"). Contractor and
Operator shall have the right to make use of such Data, free of charge, for the purpose
of Petroleum Operations.

14.3

Contractor and Operator may, for use in Petroleum Operations, retain copies or samples
of material or information constituting the Data and, with the approval of SOC, original
material. Where such material is capable of reproduction or division and originals have
been delivered to SOC, Contractor and Operator may export samples or other
reproduced material for processing or laboratory examination or analysis, taking into
consideration whether such analysis can be conducted in the Republic of Iraq.
Contractor and Operator shall guarantee their proper handling and keeping, and that
such exports shall be returned to the Republic of Iraq within a maximum period of three
(3) Months from the date of completion of any study, analysis or processing thereof,
except for the consumable samples and materials.

14.4

Contractor and Operator shall save and keep in the Republic of Iraq, for a minimum
period of one (1) Year, representative portions of each sample of cores and cuttings
taken from drilled wells, to be disposed of or forwarded in a manner directed by SOC.

14.5

Contractor shall work with SOC to establish of entities in the Republic of Iraq capable of
analyzing and processing Data obtained during PetrOleum Operations.
(End of Article 14)

ARTICLE 15 - REPORTS AND RECORDS
15.1

15.2

Operator shall once the FOD is established report in writing to SOC the progress of
Petroleum Operations according to the following schedule:
(a)

within one (1) Month of the last day of March, June, September and December
covering the previous Quarter; and

(b)

within three (3) Months of the last day of December covering the previous
Calendar Year.

A report under Article 15.1 shall contain~:hout limitation, the following i'¥pect

N

period which it covers:
(a)

details of Petroleum Operations and the factual information obtained;

(b)

description of the area in which Operator has operated;

(c)

account of the expenditure on Petroleum Operations in accordance with the
Accounting Procedure; and

(d)

maps indicating all bore-holes, wells and other Petroleum Operations.

15.3

Contractor and Operator shall prepare at all times during the Term accurate and current
records of their operations. Such records shall be maintained by Contractor and
Operator in accordance with procedures to be established by the JMC in accordance
with Best International Petroleum Industry Practices.

15.4

Operator's reports on Petroleum Operations shall comply with the Law.
(End of Article 15)

ARTICLE 16 - ACCESS AND INSPECTION
16.1

Duly authorised inspectors of SOC shall, upon written prior notice to the Operator and
Contractor, have access to the Contract Area and any other area where Petroleum
Operations are being carried out, for the purpose of inspection of the same. Such
inspectors may examine the books, registers and records of Operator and may require
Operator to make a reasonable number of surveys, drawings, tests and the like for the
purpose of enforcing the provisions of this Contract. They shall, for this purpose, be
entitled to make reasonable use or inspection of devices, machinery and instruments
used for measurement and other Petroleum Operations. The inspectors shall make all
reasonable efforts to conduct any inspection in a manner that will result in a minimum of
inconvenience and interruption to the Petroleum Operations, and the inspectors shall
always take due account of the advice from the Operator and the Contractor when
conducting the inspections. Such inspectors shall be given assistance by the agents and
employees of Operator to facilitate the objectives of their task and to avoid endangering
or hindering the safety or efficiency of Petroleum Operations. Operator shall offer such
inspectors all privileges and facilities afforded to its own staff in the Field and shall
provide them, free of charge, with reasonable office space and adequately furnished
housing and lodging while they are in the Field whether on temporary or permanent
basis.

16.2

Competent Government authorities shall have access to the Contract Area and to the
operations conducted thereon by Operator, in the course of carrying out their duties in
accordance with the Law. Operator shall offer the necessary assistance and services to
such officials free of charge in order to facilitate their objectives.

16.3

Reasonable costs and expenses incurred by Contractor or Operator in implementing the
provisions of this Article shall be considered as Petroleum Costs.
I

t'\}

(End of Article 16)

28

'V

M'd

/11(P

ARTICLE 17 - MEASUREMENT, TRANSFER, AND DELIVERY OF CRUDE OIU EXPORT
OIL
17.1

The volume and quality of Crude Oil shall be measured at a Production Measurement
Point, immediately upstream of the Transfer Point. The location of the PMP and TP shall
be specified in the approved Rehabilitation Plan so as to be within or close to the
Contract Area.

17.2

In accordance with Addendum Two, the Operator shall deliver Net Production to
Transporter at the Transfer Point. The transportation of Crude Oil from the Transfer
Point to the Delivery Point shall be carried out by the Transporter, under the terms of
Addendum Two and the Crude Oil Transfer Agreement. Transporter shall act exclusively
on behalf of SOC, and the Contractor and Operator shall have no liability or obligations
in respect of the transportation of Crude Oil from the Transfer Point to the Delivery
Point, except as set forth in Annex E.
Where production from the Contract Area is curtailed or suspended, other than for minor
service outages, through failure of Transporter to receive the same at the Transfer Point
through no fault of the Operator or Contractor, the Parties shall meet and agree, as soon
as possible, appropriate measures to compensate the Contractor in accordance with
Article 12.5.

17.3

Methods and procedures for measurement of volume and quality of Crude Oil at the
Transfer Point shall be as per Addendum Two and the Crude Oil Transfer Agreement.
Methods and procedures for measurement of volume and quality of Export Oil at the
Delivery Point shall be as per standard practice of SOMO in respect of the Export Oil.

17.4

Crude Oil may be commingled with crude oil produced from other fields. If Contractor
chooses to receive Supplementary Fees or Service Fees in the form of Export Oil, the
quality of Export Oil that may be lifted by Contractor at the Delivery Point shall be any
available standard Iraqi export blend of nearest quality to that produced from the Field.

17.5

The volume of Export Oil that may be lifted by Contractor at the Delivery Point shall be
determined in accordance with Articles 18 and 19, Annex C and Addendum Four.

17.6

If agreed in an approved Plan, Contractor shall finance and/or through the Operator
build Transportation Facilities downstream of the Transfer Point. In the event that
Contractor finances and/or builds such Transportation Facilities, they shall be handed
over to the Transporter upon completion and commissioning.

17.7

Any cost and expenses incurred by Contractor pursuant to Article 17.6 shall be
considered as Supplementary Costs.
(End of Article 17)

ARTICLE 18 - VALUATION OF EXPORT OIL
18.1

V ,;f!/;t

It is the intent of both Parties that the pricing of Export Oil for all purposes under this

Contract shall reflect the prevailing export market price FOB Delivery Point.

29

18.2

The Export Oil Price for each quantity and quality of Export Oil that may be lifted by
Contractor, during any Month in a Lifting Quarter, shall be SOMa's declared asp for:
18.2.1

the Month of loading for such quantity;

18.2.2

the quality and Delivery Point for such quantity; and

18.2.3

the final destination to which such Export Oil is delivered by the Contractor.

For the avoidance of doubt in calculating the Export Oil Price for any quantity of Export
Oil the standard provisions stipulated in SOMa's standard crude oil sales agreements,
shall be applied including provisions relating to (a) API escalation/de-escalation, and (b)
freight protection.
18.3

In the event that Export Oil market conditions oblige SOMa to adopt a different pricing
mechanism, SOMa shall promptly advise Contractor of the new pricing mechanism.

18.4

The determination of the Export Oil Price, as above, (used for actualising the quantities
of Export Oil that may be lifted by Contractor in each Month of the said Lifting Quarter)
as well as adjustments required to the quantity of Export Oil to be lifted (due to the
timing between estimated and actual dates of liftings) shall be pursuant to Addendum
Four and Annex C (Article 9.6).

18.5

Contractor shall cooperate with SOMa in areas such as:
(a)

assessment of worldwide evolution in export qualities of crude oil;

(b)

market studies and outlet forecasts in various market areas; and

(c)

other information concerning Export Oil market conditions.

The costs of such cooperation shall be paid by Contractor.
(End of Article 18)
ARTICLE 19 - SUPPLEMENTARY FEES AND SERVICE FEES

19.1

For the Petroleum Operations performed under this Contract, Contractor is entitled to
Supplementary Fees and Service Fees.
In accordance with this Article 19,
Supplementary Fees shall be comprised of Supplementary Costs. Service Fees shall
be comprised of Petroleum Costs and a Remuneration Fee.

19.2

Supplementary Costs
Contractor shall start charging Supplementary Costs to the Operating Account as from
the Effective Date, in accordance with this Contract and the Accounting Procedure but
the same shall be due and payable according to the following:
(a)

the signature bonus paid under Article 4 shall be amortized and recovered over
twenty (20) equal Quarterly payments beginning with the ninth Quarter following
the Quarter in which the Effective Date occurs;

(b)

de-mining costs incurred pursuant to Article 7.4 shall accrue and be recovered
30

/JII/

over eight (8) equal Quarterly payments beginning with the first Quarter following
the date on which de-mining costs start being incurred;

19.3

(c)

costs or expenses incurred pursuant to Articles 7.7 (b), 10.4, 10.6, 12.6, and
17.6 for additional facilities shall accrue and be payable beginning in the first
Month of the Calendar Quarter following their payment date;

(d)

costs or expenditures incurred pursuant to Article 41.16 for remediation of pre­
existing environmental conditions shall accrue and be payable beginning in the
first Month of the Calendar Quarter following their payment date; and

(e)

outstanding balances on all Supplementary Costs shall bear interest at UBOR
plus one percent (1 %) from the date when Supplementary Costs are incurred
until the date when Supplementary Fees are received.

Supplementary Fees
The Supplementary Fees due to Contractor shall be paid in Export Oil at the Delivery
Point or, at SOC's option, in cash, in USD, within sixty (60) days of the submission of an
invoice pursuant to Article 9 of the Accounting Procedure. For payment in Export Oil,
the Export Oil Price shall be in accordance with Article 18. SOC shall notify Contractor
of its election whether to pay Supplementary Fees in cash or in Export Oil within ten (10)
days of receipt of Contractor's first invoice for payment of Supplementary Fees. Such
election shall remain in effect for the remainder of this Contract, unless otherwise
agreed by the Parties or SOC is unable to pay the Supplementary Fees in Export Oil for
any reason whatsoever then payment shall be made in cash.

19.4

(a)

Supplementary Fees shall be deemed to cover all amounts due to Contractor for
Supplementary Costs.

(b)

Supplementary Fees shall become due and payable as detailed in Article 19.2
and shall be paid to the extent of ten percent (10%) of the deemed revenues of
the Baseline Production.

(c)

Any due and payable Supplementary Fees that remain unpaid in respect of any
Calendar Quarter shall be carried forward and paid in succeeding Quarter(s) until
fully paid.

(d)

SOC reserves the right at any time by notice to Contractor to decrease the
amortization periods specified in Articles 19.2(a) and 19.2(b), and/or increase the
percentage of Baseline Production specified in Article 19.3(b).

PetrOleum Costs
Contractor shall start charging Petroleum Costs to the Operating Account as from the
Effective Date, in accordance with this Contract and the Accounting Procedure, but the
same shall be due and payable only after the Service Fees Eligibility Date.

19.5

Remuneration Fee
Contractor shall become entitled to the Remuneration Fee and shall start charging the
same to the Operating Account only after the Service Fees Eligibility Date~/
~/

31

l'

(a)

For each Calendar Quarter, commencing with the Calendar Quarter following the
Quarter in which the Service Fees Eligibility Date occurs, the Remuneration Fee
shall be an amount equal to the product of the Remuneration Fee per Barrel
applicable to such Quarter, multiplied by the Incremental Production applicable
to such Quarter and subject to the performance adjustment in Article 19.5(e).

(b)

The Remuneration Fee per Barrel of Crude Oil applicable for all Calendar
Quarters during any given Calendar Year shall be determined on the basis of the
R-Factor calculated at the end of the preceding Calendar Year for the Field as
follows:
R-Factor
Less than 1.0
1.0 to less than 1.25
1.25 to less than 1.5
1.5 to less than 2.0
2.0 and above

(c)

Remuneration Fee per Barrel (USD)
2.00
1.60
1.20
1.00
0.60

For the purposes of calculating Baseline Production and Incremental Production,
the Baseline Production Rate for any Quarter, expressed to the nearest Barrel of
oil per day, will be calculated according to the product of the Initial Production
Rate and a Decline Factor for that Quarter according to the formulae:
BPRn

=

IPR * DFn

and

(d)

DF n
where:
BPRn
IPR
DFn
n

=

DF raised to the power ((n)/4)

=
=
=
=

DF

=

Baseline Production Rate for Quarter n
Initial Production Rate
Decline Factor for Quarter n
Number of the Quarter following the Quarter in which the
Effective Date occurs
0.95

The R-Factor achieved by Contractor as at the end of any Calendar Year shall
be calculated by dividing the aggregate value of Cash Receipts from the
Effective Date up to and including that Calendar Year by the aggregate of
Expenditure over that same time frame.
For the purposes of calculating the R-Factor:
Aggregate "Cash Receipts" of Contractor from Petroleum Operations as of the
end of any Calendar Year is the aggregate value from the Effective Date up to
and including that Year of:
(i)

Service Fees paid to Contractor as provided in Articles 19.6; plus

32

(ii)

any Contractor's incidental income (of the type specified in the
Accounting Procedure) arising from Petroleum Operations; and

Aggregate "Expenditure" made by Contractor for Petroleum Operations as of the
end of any Calendar Year is the aggregate value from the Effective Date up to
and including that Year of:

(e)

19.6

(i)

Petroleum Costs; plus

(ii)

Training, Technology and Scholarship Fund as per Article 26. For the
avoidance of doubt, this expense is included as Expenditures for
purposes of determining the R-Factor, but shall not be Petroleum Costs.

During the Plateau Production Period the Remuneration Fee payable in respect
of any Quarter shall be adjusted by multiplying it by the Performance Factor.
However, any adjustment to the Remuneration Fee under this Article may cease
to apply in accordance with Article 12.5 in relation to: (i) minimizing Associated
Gas wastage (under Article 12.5(b»; (ii) Government imposed production
curtailment (under Article 12.5(e»; and/or (iii) where normal production is
curtailed or suspended through failure of Transporter to receive the same at the
Transfer Point through no fault of the Operator or Contractor (under Article
12.5(f».

Service Fees
(a)

The Service Fees due to Contractor shall be paid without interest, in Export Oil at
the Delivery Point or, at Contractor's option, in cash, in USD, within sixty (60)
days of the submission of an invoice pursuant to Article 9 of the Accounting
Procedure. For payment of Contractor's entitlement in Export Oil, the Export Oil
Price shall be determined in accordance with Article 18. Contractor shall notify
SOC of its election whether to receive Service Fees in cash or in Export Oil no
later than the end of the Rehabilitation Period and thereafter annually seven (7)
months prior to the commencement of each Calendar Year or SOC is unable to
pay the Service Fees in Export Oil for any reason whatsoever then payment shall
be made in cash.

(b)

The Service Fees and Supplementary Fees shall be deemed to cover all costs,
expenses, liabilities and remuneration to Contractor under this Contract. SOC
shall not be obliged to pay any other compensation whatsoever to the Contractor
for the fulfilment of its obligations under this Contract unless otherwise provided
for under this Contract.

(c)

Service Fees shall become due and payable starting with the first Calendar
Quarter following the Quarter in which the Service Fees Eligibility Date occurs
and shall be paid to the extent of fifty percent (50%) of the deemed revenues of
the Incremental Production. It is understood that payment of due and payable
Petroleum Costs shall have priority over the payment of due and payable
Remuneration Fees.

(d)

Any due and payable Service Fees that remain unpaid in respect of any
Calendar Quarter shall be carried forward and paid in succeeding Quarter(s) until

fully paid.
33

J
V

i:/lll

19.7

For the purpose of calculating the Supplementary Fees and Service Fees only, the
Baseline Production and Incremental Production of Crude Oil under Articles 19.3 (b) and
19.6 (c) shall be valued at the Provisional Export Oil Price, pursuant to Articles 17 and
18.

19.8

Subject to Article 8, any due and payable Supplementary Fees and Service Fees that
remain outstanding at the expiry or termination of this Contract shall become
immediately due and payable within thirty (30) days thereof, or under such other terms
as may be agreed by the Parties.

19.9

In case the Supplementary Fees or Service Fees are paid in Export Oil, SOC shall
arrange with SOMO to deliver to Contractor at the Delivery Point an amount of Export
Oil, at the relevant Export Oil Price, equivalent to the amount of Supplementary Fees or
Service Fees owed and payable hereunder. Contractor's Quarterly lifting of Export Oil
shall be estimated in advance on the basis of Supplementary Fees and Service Fees
due and payable in the Lifting Quarter, unpaid Supplementary Fees or Service Fees
carried forward, production schedule and Provisional Export Oil Price. Contractor's final
lifting shall be adjusted on the basis of actual amounts of Supplementary Fees or
Service Fees owed as computed under this Article 19, and on the applicable Export Oil
Price in accordance with the provisions of Article 18, Annex C and Addendum Four.
(End of Article 19)

ARTICLE 20 - BOOKS OF ACCOUNT, ACCOUNTING AND AUDIT
20.1

Contractor and Operator shall maintain at their business offices in the Republic of Iraq
books of account, in accordance with the Accounting Procedure, generally accepted
accounting principles used in the international petroleum industry, and such other books,
records and original supporting documents necessary to show the work performed and
expenditures and costs incurred including the quantity and value of all Petroleum
produced, saved, and delivered as well as the quantity and value of Export Oil received
by Contractor at the Delivery Point.

20.2

Contractor and Operator shall keep books of account and accounting records in Dollars
and in the English language. Contractor and Operator shall also prepare and keep an
Arabic summary of the main items of these books of account and accounting records.

20.3

Operator shall furnish to the Parties or their designees monthly reports showing the
quantity of Petroleum produced and saved from the Contract Area. Such reports shall be
prepared in accordance with practices generally used in the international petroleum
industry and in a form agreed upon with the Parties and shall be signed by the
authorised representative of Operator or his deputy and delivered to the Parties or their
designees within thirty (30) days after the end of the Month covered by such report.

20.4

The Parties shall jointly appoint an independent auditor of international qualification and
standing to audit all the books and accounts of Contractor and Operator on an annual
basis and report thereon. The costs of such audit, together with the audit fees of the
Iraqi Supreme Auditing Board for statutory audit of the Contractor's branch office(s) in
the Republic of Iraq, shall be considered as Petroleum Costs. For cost recovery
purposes, the auditors shall in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles
used in the international petroleum indu:ry determine whether:

V ;:lJ!/

(a)

the record of costs is correct;

(b)

the costs are in accordance with this Contract;

(c)

the costs are properly classified in accordance with the expenditure classification;

(d)

documentation exists to justify such costs and expenditures; and

(e)

evidence exists of fraudulent records and accounts in respect of the costs
incurred.

20.5

Contractor shall, within forty five (45) days after the end of each Quarter, submit to SOC
a statement of Supplementary Costs and PetrOleum Costs showing costs incurred by
Contractor during such Quarter, and when applicable a statement for cost recovery for
that Quarter as per Annex C.

20.6

Contractor and Operator shall submit to SOC a set of accounts audited by the
independent auditor for each Calendar Year within three (3) Months from the last day of
said Calendar Year to show the results of Petroleum Operations.

20.7

Contractor's and Operator's books, records and necessary supporting documents shall
be made available for auditing by SOC at any time during regular working hours for
twelve (12) Months from the end of each Quarter to which such documents relate. If
within such twelve (12) Months, SOC has not advised Contractor and Operator of its
objections, the said books, records and supporting documents shall be considered
approved. Audits conducted by auditors appointed under Article 20.4, the Iraqi Supreme
Auditing Board or SOC shall be conducted in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles used in the international petroleum industry.

20.8

If the SOC has an objection to any costs or expenses as reported and invoiced by the
Contractor, the SOC will notify the Contractor of its objection in writing but shall pay both
the disputed and undisputed amounts pending resolution of the matter. Within one (1)
Month from the date of Contractor's receipt of SOC's objection, Contractor and SOC
shall mutually agree to either seek in good faith an acceptable solution or nominate one
(1) or more Experts to settle the matter. If the matter is referred to an Expert, the Expert
shall, within three (3) Months following their appointment, provide their solution to the
dispute that is in line with the provisions of this Contract and Annex C. Failing such
settlement, either Party may refer the matter to arbitration pursuant to Article 37.

20.9

During, and for a period of three (3) Years after the Term, the books of account and
other books and records referred to above shall be made available by Contractor and
Operator at all reasonable times for auditing by duly authorised representatives of the
Government, in accordance with the Law.

(End of Article 20)
ARTICLE 21 - EXCHANGE AND CURRENCY CONTROL
21.1

Contractor and Operator shall have the right of availability, free possession, use of, and
internal and external disposal of foreign currency.

21.2

Contractor shall provide funds necessary for Petroleum Operations in the Republic of

35

V,#

Iraq under this Contract in freely convertible foreign currencies supplied from abroad.
21.3

Contractor and Operator are authorized to open and operate accounts in foreign banks
outside the Republic of Iraq and shall have the right to make payments out of the said
accounts directly in foreign currencies for goods and services obtained for Petroleum
Operations in the Republic of Iraq and to charge such payments in accordance with the
provisions of this Contract without having first to transfer the funds for such payments to
the Republic of Iraq.

21.4

Contractor and Operator and any non-Iraqi Sub-Contractors shall have the right to open
and maintain bank accounts in foreign and/or local currencies in the Republic of Iraq in
accordance with Central Bank of Iraq regulations and retain or dispose of any funds
therein for its Petroleum Operations in the Republic of Iraq in accordance with Central
Bank of Iraq regulations.
(End of Article 21)

ARTICLE 22 - TITLE TO ASSETS
22.1

All assets acquired and/or provided by Contractor or Operator, in connection with or in
relation to Petroleum Operations, the costs of which are subject to cost recovery in
accordance with the provisions of this Contract, shall become the property of SOC upon
their landing in the Republic of Iraq.

22.2

Notwithstanding the above, Contractor and Operator shall be entitled to the full and free
use of such assets for the purpose and Term of this Contract. During the Term, SOC
and Contractor shall not assign, sell or otherwise dispose of such fixed and/or movable
assets except by mutual agreement.

22.3

The provisions of Article 22.1 shall not apply to equipment leased by Contractor or
Operator or belonging to Sub-Contractors who perform services or carry out works in
connection with Petroleum Operations. Contractor and Operator and non-Iraqi Sub­
Contractors may import such equipment on a temporary basis. Unless otherwise
agreed by SOC, such equipment shall be re-exported from the Republic of Iraq subject
to the provisions of Article 25, as and when they are no longer required for Petroleum
Operations.
(End of Article 22)

ARTICLE 23 - TAXES
23.1

Each entity comprising Contractor shall keep books of account and be individually liable
for and shall pay corporate income tax in accordance with the Law.

23.2

In no event shall SOC be liable under this Contract for any taxes payable by Companies
outside of the Republic of Iraq.

23.3

For the avoidance of doubt, it is the understanding of the Parties that the sole tax liability
of Contractor under this Contract shall not exceed corporate income tax levied at a rate
not to exceed thirty five percent (35%) of Contractor's taxable profit under the Law which
shall, as between the Contractor and SOC, be deemed to be the Remuneration Fee
received during the relevant Tax Year calculated in accordance with Article 19.5
("Contractor's Income Tax Liability").
36

23.4

In the event Contractor is subject to any demand to pay other taxes (other than or in excess
of Contractor's Income Tax Liability) SOC shall bear and pay on behalf of Contractor all such
other or additional taxes and shall indemnify and hold Contractor harmless against any and
all liabilities relating to the payment of such other or additional taxes.
(End of Article 23)

ARTICLE 24 - PARTNERSHIP, INDEMNITY AND INSURANCE

24.1

It is expressly agreed that it is not the purpose or intention of this Contract to create, nor
shall this Contract be construed as creating, any mining partnership, joint venture,
commercial partnership or other partnership.

24.2

Except for the period when SOC is Operator or as otherwise provided in this Contract,
Contractor shall indemnify and hold SOC harmless against all and any claims, actions,
demands and proceedings made by third parties arising out of any loss or damC\ge,
resulting from an act or omission of Contractor and/or Operator and/or their Sub­
Contractors in their conduct of Petroleum Operations. All costs incurred by Contractor to
indemnify and hold SOC harmless as aforesaid shall be considered as Petroleum Costs
except in the case of Gross Negligence or Wilful Misconduct on the part of the
Contractor and/or Operator and/or their Sub-Contractors.

24.3

Except for the period when SOC is Operator and in respect of the Contract Area,
Contractor shall be liable for any loss of or damage to any installations belonging to
SOC or any third party arising from Gross Negligence or Wilful Misconduct of Contractor
and/or Operator or their Sub-Contractors.

24.4

Notwithstanding the foregoing, under no circumstances shall Contractor, its Affiliates or
Operator be liable to SOC, its Affiliates or any third party, for consequential or indirect
damages, losses, expenses or liabilities, loss of profit, loss of production, reservoir or
formation damage or other losses whether or not similar to the foregoing and howsoever
arising.

24.5

Contractor shall establish an insurance plan, to be approved by the SOC, for its
operations hereunder and obtain the insurance policies in accordance therewith. Such
insurances shall cover the types of exposure that are normally covered in the
international petroleum industry, including but not limited to damage to equipment,
installations and third party liabilities. Contractor and/or Operator shall ensure that Sub­
Contractors adequately insure their risks under their relevant sub-contracts.

24.6

Such insurance plan shall require that the Contractor obtains and maintains insurance
from an Iraqi insurance company or foreign insurance company permitted to conduct
business in the Republic of Iraq to cover the risks associated with the Petroleum
Operations and any other activities related thereto and as may be required by Law
during the Term, including third party liability and environmental damage and injury,
where such coverage is available in the Republic of Iraq and available on commercially
reasonable terms. If such coverage is unavailable in the Republic of Iraq, insurance
shall be obtained from a foreign insurance company. The insurance company shall
arrange, in co-operation with Contractor to the extent needed, re-insurance placement

ice-;i

for coverages on the international ma~:et for the part of exposure in

insurance company's net retention.
24.7

The cost of insurance or reinsurance obtained and maintained by Contractor and/or
Operator whether obtained inside or outside the Republic of Iraq and any amounts paid
for deductibles, losses, or claims in excess of such insurances and not attributable to
the Gross Negligence or Wilful Misconduct of Contractor or Operator or their Sub­
Contractors under this Contract shall be considered as Petroleum Costs.

24.8

Contractor and/or Operator shall notify SOC of the issue and terms of all insurance
policies obtained by it under this Contract.
(End of Article 24)

ARTICLE 25 - IMPORTS AND EXPORTS

25.1

Contractor, Operator and Sub-Contractors engaged in carrying out Petroleum
Operations shall be permitted to import and shall be exempted from customs duties with
respect to the importation of machinery, equipment, vehicles, materials, supplies,
consumables and movable property to be used solely for the purpose of carrying out
Petroleum Operations and supporting activities. Contractor, Operator and Sub­
Contractors shall comply with the applicable administrative formalities in this respect.

25.2

Expatriate employees of Contractor, Operator and Sub-Contractors shall be permitted to
import and shall be exempted from customs duties with respect to the reasonable
importation of household goods and personal effects, provided that such property is
imported for the sole use of the employee and his family and provided further that such
imported property shall be re-exported by employee, without any export duty or impost
upon termination of his employment, or be disposed of in the Republic of Iraq in
accordance with the Law.

25.3

Items imported by Contractor, Operator or Sub-Contractors on temporary basis and no
longer required for Petroleum Operations or supporting activities shall, unless otherwise
agreed by SOC, be re-exported without any export duty or impost in accordance with the
Law.

25.4

The sale in the Republic of Iraq of any items imported under this Contract shall be
subject to SOC's prior consent and to the Law.

25.5

Customs duties, as used herein, shall include all duties, taxes and other financial
imposts which may be due as a result of the importation of the above-mentioned items
but, shall not include charges, dues or fees of general application to be paid to
Governmental entities for services rendered.

25.6

Contractor shall be exempted from any export dUty or impost with respect to the Export
Oil that Contractor may lift under this Contract, except for port dues of general
application to all buyers which are payable for services rendered by the port authorities
in accordance with the Law. Such port dues shall not be considered Petro~eu~ COS~.4
(End of Article 25)

38

'V

/ If/

ARTICLE 26 - EMPLOYMENT, TRAINING, AND TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER
26.1

Without prejudice to the right of Contractor and Operator to select and employ such
number of personnel as, in the opinion of the Contractor or Operator, are required for
carrying out Petroleum Operations in a safe, cost effective and efficient manner,
Contractor and Operator shall, to the maximum extent possible, employ, and require
Sub-Contractors to employ, Iraqi nationals having the requisite qualifications and
experience.

26.2

Through a Training, Technology and Scholarship Fund, Contractor and Operator shall
offer and facilitate for an agreed number of Iraqi nationals, as designated by SOC in
consultation with Contractor, the opportunity, both inside and/or outside of the Republic
of Iraq, for on-the-job training and practical experience in Petroleum Operations, and
academic education. The Fund shall also be used for supporting oil and gas related
technology and research including the establishment or upgrading of research institutes
inside the Republic of Iraq.

26.3

As a minimum, Contractor shall allocate during the Term an annual amount of five
million USD (US$ 5,000,000) to the Training, Technology and Scholarship Fund. The
Fund payment shall not be recoverable as Petroleum Costs.

26.4

Not later than twelve (12) Months after the Effective Date, Contractor shall, in
consultation with SOC, establish and implement training programs for staff positions in
each phase and level of Petroleum Operations including skilled, technical, executive and
management positions, with a view to ensuring increased employment of Iraqi nationals
and a commensurate reduction of expatriate employees.

26.5

Each Company may separately negotiate, in good faith, technical assistance
agreements with SOC to make available, on commercially ~greeable terms, technology
and information of a proprietary nature for use in the Republic of Iraq by SOC and its
Affiliates.
(End of Article 26)

ARTICLE 27 - PARTICIPATION
27.1

The State Partner shall have twenty-five percent (25%) of Contractor's total Participating
Interest and the remaining Participating Interest of seventy five percent (75%) shall be
apportioned between the Companies as follows:
BP:

thirty-eight percent (38%);

PetroChina:

thirty-seven percent (37%).

27.2

Companies shall pay for all of the State Partner's share of Petroleum Costs and
Supplementary Costs during the Term and any extension thereto. The Companies shall
have all Petroleum Costs paid as Service Fees and Supplementary Costs paid as
Supplementary Fees, however the State Partner shall be entitled to receive its twenty­
five percent (25%) Participating Interest of any Remuneration Fee paid to Contractor.

27.3

Participation shall further be subject to the provisions of Addendum on, ,

39

V

1#

(End of Article 27)
ARTICLE 28 - ASSIGNMENT
28.1

Neither Party may assign its rights or obligations under this Contract, in whole or in part,
without the prior written consent of the other Party, except that such rights and
obligations may be assigned without such consent to an Affiliate or successor of such
Party or to a firm or corporation acquiring all or substantially all of the business and
assets of such Party. The direct or indirect transfer of shares or other ownership
interests in any Company (except for the transfer of shares in a listed parent company)
shall constitute an assignment of rights and obligations under this Contract and shall be
subject to this Article 28.1.

28.2

By providing SOC one (1) Month prior written notice of its intent, any Company shall
have the right to assign any of its Participating Interest, shares, rights, privileges, duties
or obligations under this Contract to an Affiliate. Such assignment shall not release said
Company from its obligations under this Contract and it shall remain jointly responsible
together with the assignee Affiliate for the proper and timely execution of this Contract.

28.3

In the event that any Company wishes to assign, in whole or in part, any of its
Participating Interest, shares, rights, privileges, duties or obligations under this Contract
to a third party or an Affiliate that is not wholly-owned and controlled, the Company shall
submit to SOC a request to this effect giving detailed evidence of the technical and
financial competence of the recommended assignee. SOC shall consider the said
request and notify Company of its approval or otherwise within three (3) Months of
receipt thereof. Before such assignment becomes effective, the foreign assignee shall
first provide SOC with a guarantee acceptable to SOC in the form set out in Annex F
after which SOC shall, to the extent of the assigned Participating Interest, release
assignor from its obligations under this Contract and any guarantee provided to it by
assignor.

28.4

If any Company wishes to assign part of its Participating Interest in this Contract to a
third party pursuant to Article 28.3, SOC shall within the period set out under Article 28.3
have the option to take such part and assign it to a nominated Iraqi entity on the same
terms and conditions offered to the third party.

28.5

Notwithstanding the foregoing, for the purpose of financing Petroleum Operations, any
entity constituting Contractor may pledge, or otherwise encumber totally or partially, its
rights under this Contract to an internationally recognized bank and/or financing
institution acceptable to SOC (such acceptance not to be unreasonably withheld)
provided that such pledge or encumbrance shall not in any way affect the rights or
interests of SOC.

28.6

Without prejudice to the provisions of the Heads of Joint Operating Agreement
(Addendum One) between the entities constituting Contractor, in the event that any
Company (or the Affiliated company that provides a guarantee) becomes bankrupt, or
makes an arrangement with or assignment in favour of its creditors or makes a
composition with creditors, or if it assigns to a third party any of its interests/shares in
this Contract contrary to the provisions herein, or goes into liquidation other than for
reconstruction or amalgamation with a wholly-owned and controlled Affiliate, SOC shall
have the right to terminate the participation of such Company in this Contract by a

written notice to Contractor. The ri9h: and obligations of such Co~y s/~

assigned to the remaining Companies proportionately to their respective Participating
Interests or as they may otherwise mutually agree.
28.7

The State Partner shall have the right to assign its Participating Interest only to an entity
that is entirely owned and controlled by the Government otherwise any assignment by
the State Partner of its Participating Interest shall require the consent of the Companies.
(End of Article 28)

ARTICLE 29 - LAWS AND REGULATIONS
29.1

Contractor and Operator shall be bound by and shall comply, in all respects, with the
provisions of the Law. Unless otherwise provided in this Contract, Contractor shall
indemnify and save harmless SOC against all penalties, fines and other liabilities of
every kind for breach of the Law by Contractor or Operator.

29.2

Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 29.1, Contractor and Operator shall, in
accordance with the Law, be exempted from customs and stamp duties on the
execution of this Contract, and from restrictions concerning work licences and
employment of expatriates, sUbject to the provisions of Article 9.22. However,
Contractor and Operator shall submit all data and information required by the relevant
Iraqi authorities in this respect.

29.3

Contractor and Operator shall in all their sub-contracts, include a provision whereby
Sub-Contractors shall undertake to abide by and comply with the Law.

29.4

Subject to Article 29.5 if, after the Effective Date, the financial interests of Contractor are
adversely and substantially affected by a change to the Law that was in force on the
Effective Date, or by revocation, modification, or non renewal of any approvals,
consents or exemptions granted to Contractor pursuant to this Contract (other than as a
result of Gross Negligence or Wilful Misconduct of Contractor or Operator), the Parties
shall, within ninety (90) days, agree on necessary adjustments to the relevant provisions
of this Contract in order to maintain Contractor's financial interests under this Contract
reasonably unchanged.

29.5

It is the understanding of the Parties that the corporate income tax payable by Contractor
shall not exceed Contractor's Income Tax Liability. Contractor shall bear such corporate
income tax once applicable, according to the Law, provided, however, in the event the
Contractor's tax liability due under the Law exceeds Contractor's Income Tax Liability then
SOC shall assume, pay and discharge in the name and on behalf of Contractor, any excess
tax liability arising under the Law over Contractor's Income Tax Liability.

29.6

Should the Parties be unable to agree within ninety (90) days on any amendments to be
made in respect of Articles 29.4 and 29.5 or such other period as may be agreed by the
Parties, the dispute may be resolved in accordance with Article 37.
(End of Article 29)

ARTICLE 30 - LOCAL GOODS AND SERVICES
30.1

Works and services perfonned in the :epUbliC of Iraq through sub-co~cts sh~1

carried out on a competitive basis. Preference shall always be given to Iraqi entities and
firms, or foreign firms in association therewith, provided that their relevant capabilities
and prices are competitive with those available in the international market.
30.2

Preference shall be given to locally manufactured and/or available goods, materials,
equipment, consumables and the like provided that their technical specifications,
availability, prices, and time of delivery are comparable to those available in the
international market.

30.3

Contractor and Operator shall ensure that contracts with Sub-Contractors, agents,
assignees and employees shall strictly adhere to the provisions of this Article 30.
(End of Article 30)

ARTICLE 31 - FORCE MAJEURE
31.1

The non-performance or delay in performance by either Party of its obligations or duties
under this Contract shall be excused if and to the extent that such non-performance or
delay is caused by Force Majeure.

31.2

The Party affected by Force Majeure shall notify the other Party thereof, in writing within
fourteen (14) days, stating the cause and the extent of effect of such Force Majeure and
shall keep the other Party informed of significant developments. The affected Party shall
use all reasonable diligence to remove or overcome the Force Majeure situation as
quickly as possible in a cost-effective manner.

31.3

Force Majeure shall mean any cause or event, unforeseen or beyond the reasonable
control of the Party claiming to be affected by such event, and shall include, but without
limitation, Acts of God, war (whether declared or undeclared), force of nature,
insurrection, riot, fire, and with respect to Contractor only legislation/order of the
Government and other acts or circumstances beyond the control of either Party affected
by it, provided always that such acts or circumstances are not attributable to the Party
invoking Force Majeure or its Affiliates. The inability to pay monies due shall not
constitute a condition of Force Majeure.

31.4

In the event that the Petroleum Operations are delayed, curtailed or prevented due to
Force Majeure for a period exceeding ninety (90) consecutive days, then the Term
together with all rights and obligations hereunder shall be extended accordingly, subject
to the provisions of Article 8, and the Parties shall meet shortly after a notice sent by the
Contractor to SOC to, in good faith, agree on modifications to this Contract which will
enable the Contractor's rights and obligations to be restored. If the Parties are unable to
reach an agreement on the possible modifications to be made to this Contract within
thirty (30) days, such disagreement shall be submitted to arbitration in accordance with
the provisions of Articles 37.4 to 37.8.

31.5

It is agreed by the Parties that the security conditions prevailing in the Contract Area on
Contract signing date shall not constitute a condition of Force Majeure for either Party.
The Parties also agree that the political and security conditions generally prevailing in
the Republic of Iraq on the Contract signing date shall not constitute a condition of
Force Majeure for either Party unless these conditions prevent the implementation of

Petroleum Operations.

)
42

V

/

IV

(End of Article 31)
ARTICLE 32 - ENTIRE AGREEMENT AND AMENDMENTS

32.1

This Contract constitutes the entire agreement between SOC and Contractor relating to
the Field. Hence it supersedes any previous representations, whether explicit or implicit,
and any prior agreement of any kind or nature, whether oral or written, in this respect.

32.2

This Contract shall not be amended or supplemented except by an instrument in writing
signed by duly authorized representatives of both Parties.

32.3

If any provision of this Contract shall be found by any court, tribunal or administrative
body of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unenforceable, the invalidity or
unenforceability shall not affect the other provisions of this Contract and all provisions
not affected by such invalidity or unenforceability shall remain in full force and effect.
The Parties shall attempt to substitute, for any invalid or unenforceable provision, a valid
and enforceable provision that achieves to the greatest possible extent, the principal
objectives of the invalid or unenforceable provisions. However, in the event of the
Contract being declared by any competent Iraqi authority invalid or voided under the
Law, SOC hereby indemnifies and holds Contractor harmless for any and all costs
actually incurred by Contractor, including, demobilisation costs, Petroleum Costs,
Supplementary Costs paid by Contractor but not recovered, Remuneration Fees
accrued but not paid at the date this Contract is declared invalid or voided and penalties,
fines, levies, if any, imposed on Contractor under the Law.

32.4

The provisions of this Contract shall inure to the benefit of and be binding upon the
successors and permitted assignees of the Parties.
(End of Article 32)

ARTICLE 33 - CONFIDENTIALITY AND TECHNOLOGY OWNERSHIP

33.1

All information and data obtained in connection with or in relation to this Contract shall
be kept confidential by the Parties and their Affiliates and shall not be disclosed or
communicated to any third party without the other Party's prior written consent, except
(i) to Affiliates; (ii) to any professional consultant retained by a Party, (iii) to a bona fide
prospective assignee, or (iv) where it is necessary for the approval, implementation
and/or financing of Petroleum Operations; provided that in all cases of disclosure the
party to whom the information is disclosed shall agree to the same confidentiality
obligation as contained herein.

33.2

The confidentiality undertaking in Article 33.1 shall not apply:
(a)

upon the confidential information becoming public knowledge other than by
default on the part of a Party;

(b)

upon such confidential information becoming available to a Party from a third
party (unless the third party acts in violation of a confidentiality obligation of
which the Party is aware);

(c)

if such confidential information is independently developed by a Party or its
43

Affiliates; or
(d)

to the extent that such confidential information is required by the Law, judicial
proceedings or applicable stock exchange regulations to be disclosed.

33.3

The foregoing provisions of Articles 33.1 and 33.2 shall continue in force for three (3)
Years following termination or expiry of this Contract.

33.4

To the fullest extent permitted by applicable laws or agreements, the entities constituting
Contractor agree to make available on reasonable terms the benefits of their most
appropriate technical expertise and technology (and that of their Affiliates) for
application in the conduct of Petroleum Operations, including such technology as can
best improve the economic yield or performance of the Petroleum reservoirs operated
by the Operator under this Contract. Any such technology shall remain the property of
the relevant entities constituting Contractor (or their Affiliates), subject to any licensing
or other appropriate arrangements entered into in connection with Petroleum
Operations. The Operator shall be entitled to use such technology only for Petroleum
Operations, subject to the terms of such licensing or other arrangements.

33.5

Any technology specifically developed by the Contractor or the Operator in the course of
their activities under this Contract shall be owned by both the entities constituting
Contractor and SOC and, except in the case of disclosure of such to, or use by, a third
party, may be used by any of them or their Affiliates in their own operations without the
consent of the other and without making any payment to the other.
(End of Article 33)

ARTICLE 34 - HEADINGS OF ARTICLES
Headings of Articles herein are inserted for convenience only and shall not affect the
construction and/or interpretation thereof.
(End of Article 34)
ARTICLE 35 - LANGUAGE
35.1

This Contract is executed in the Arabic and English languages, both having equal force.
However, if there shall be any conflict between the two versions the English version shall
prevail to the extent of the conflict.

35.2

Communication between the Parties may be in English. However, Contractor and
Operator shall use the Arabic language or both Arabic and English in all their
correspondence and dealings with Government entities in the Republic of Iraq.

35.3

Contractor and Operator shall have no obligation to use any language other than
English in their contractual relationships with Sub-Contractors and vendors in
connection with Petroleum Operations.
~

dv #'{f
44

(End of Article 35)
ARTICLE 36 - CONTRACTOR'S OFFICE IN THE REPUBLIC OF IRAQ
36.1

Each Company shall establish a presence in the Republic of Iraq as required by the
Law.

36.2

Lead Contractor shall, within ninety (90) days of the Effective Date, establish an office in
Baghdad, Iraq and shall maintain such office for the Term. SOC shall assist Lead
Contractor in establishing and maintaining the said office.

36.3

Lead Contractor shall notify SOC of the address of its office in Baghdad and of the
name of its authorised representative in the Republic of Iraq who shall be assigned on
full time resident status. The said representative shall be entrusted with sufficient
powers and authorities to represent and bind Contractor in all dealings with the
Government, SOC and third parties in the Republic of Iraq, to receive legal notices
served on Contractor, and to comply with lawful directions and orders given by the
competent Government authorities and SOC in connection with or in relation to this
Contract.

36.4

Lead Contractor shall notify SOC of any change in the address of its office or the
appointment of its representative at least ten (10) days prior to the effective date of such
change.
(End of Article 36)

ARTICLE 37 - GOVERNING LAW, CONCILIATION AND ARBITRATION
37.1

This Contract and the rights and obligations of the Parties shall be governed, interpreted
and construed in accordance with the Law.

37.2

The Parties shall endeavour to settle amicably any dispute ("the Dispute") arising out of
or in connection with or in relation to this Contract or any provision or agreement related
thereto. Where no such settlement is reached within thirty (30) days of the date when
one Party notifies the other Party of the Dispute, then the matter may, as appropriate,
be referred by the Parties to their senior management for resolution. Where no such
settlement is reached within thirty (30) days of such referral to management, any Party
to the Dispute may refer the matter, as appropriate, to an independent expert or, by
giving sixty (60) days notice to the other Party, refer the matter to arbitration as
stipulated hereunder. It is understood that the rights and obligations under this Contract
constitute commercial rather than sovereign rights or obligations and therefore no Party
shall have the right to claim, and hereby waives any, immunity from legal proceedings or
judgement enforcement in this respect.

Expert
37.3

If any Dispute arises between the Parties with respect to relevant technical matters,
such Dispute may, at the election of either Party, be referred to an independent expert
("Expert") for determination. Such Expert shall be agreed upon by the Parties to the
Dispute and shall be willing to undertake such evaluation, and shall be independent,

45

~

;#/

shall not be originated from, or have been at any time a citizen of, the country in which
any of the Parties to the Dispute is incorporated, and shall have no interest in or relation
to either Party or with any of the entities constituting the Parties and shall be qualified by
education, experience and training to evaluate the matter in Dispute. The Expert shall
render its decision within one (1) Month following the Expert's formal acceptance of its
appointment, or within such further time as the Parties may agree in writing.
The Expert shall act as an expert and not as an arbitrator. The costs of the Expert
determination shall be shared equally by the Parties in Dispute.

Arbitration
37.4

All Disputes arising out of or in connection with this Contract, other than those Disputes
that have been finally settled by reference to either senior management or Expert, shall
be finally settled under the Rules of Arbitration of the International Chamber of
Commerce by three arbitrators appointed in accordance with the said Rules.

37.5

The seat of the arbitration shall be Paris, France, unless agreed otherwise by the
Parties to the Dispute.

37.6

The language of arbitration shall be the English language. The award of arbitration shall
be in English and shall be final and binding on the Parties to the Dispute. Judgment on
the award rendered may be entered and enforced in any court having jurisdiction in
recognition and enforcement thereof. Any right to appeal or challenge any arbitral
decision or award, or to oppose enforcement of any such decision or award before a
court or any governmental authority is hereby waived by the Parties except with respect
to the limited grounds for modification or non-enforcement provided by the applicable
Rules of Arbitration of the International Chamber of Commerce.

37.7

Unless otherwise agreed by the Parties, the operations and the activities of the Parties
with respect to the performance of this Contract shall not be stopped or delayed pending
the award of arbitration.

37.8

Any arbitration under this Contract must be initiated within two (2) Years of the date on
which one Party notifies the other Party of the Dispute, and in any event within three (3)
Years of the date of the expiry or termination of this Contract.
d~
(End of Article 37)

46

,J; y/IF

ARTICLE 38 - NOTICES
38.1

38.2

All notices, statements and other communication to be given, submitted or made by any
Party to the other Party shall be deemed sufficient when sent in writing and shall be
addressed to the Parties at their addresses set out below or such other address as may
be notified in writing by the Parties in accordance herewith.
SOC

Lead Contractor

South Oil Company
Attention: Director General

BP Iraq NV
Attention: Chief Financial Officer

Address: Basra-Iraq / Bab AI-Zubair
P.O.Box 240,
Republic of Iraq

Address: c/o BP Group,
Chertsey Road, Building H,
Sunbury-on-Thames, Middlesex
TW16, UK

Notices to either Party shall be deemed validly served when delivered in person, at the
office of that Party mentioned above in the Republic of Iraq, during regular office hours
and during working days and if received outside business hours, on the next following
working day, or when received, if posted by registered mail, to the address of the office
of the said Party, or when dispatched and acknowledged, if sent by telex or facsimile, or
by any other mode mutually agreed between the Parties. Notices to and from Lead
Contractor and/or SOC should be copied to each Company, where in the case of
PetroChina the address is:
PetroChina Company Limited
Attention: President
Address: NO.9 Dongzhimen Beidajie, Dongcheng District,
Beijing, China 10007

(End of Article 38)
ARTICLE 39 - SIGNATURE. RATIFICATION AND EFFECTIVE DATE
The Contract shall enter into force upon (i) it being signed by the Parties; (ii) SOC notifying and
representing to Contractor in writing that ratification has occurred and the Contract is
enforcesble in accordance with the Law; and, (iii) the Initial Production Rate being agreed on by
the Parties.
(End of Article 39)
ARTICLE 40 - WAIVER
40.1

Failure or delay on the part of either pa: to exercise any right, power O~Vilege ur~/

this Contract shall not operate as a waiver thereof.
40.2

No waiver by either Party of anyone or more obligations or defaults by the other Party in
the performance of this Contract shall operate or be construed as a waiver of any other
obligations or defaults whether of a like or of a different character.
(End of Article 40)

ARTICLE 41 - PROTECTION OF THE ENVIRONMENT
41.1

In performance of this Contract, Operator shall conduct Petroleum Operations with due
regard to the protection of the environment and conservation of natural resources and
shall in particular:
(a)

(b)

adopt Best International Petroleum Industry Practices in conducting and
monitoring its Petroleum Operations and take necessary and adequate steps to:
(i)

prevent environmental damage and, should such environmental damage
occur, minimize such damage and the consequential effects thereof on
property and people;

(ii)

prevent harm to or degradation of livelihood or quality of life of
surrounding communities and, should some adverse impact occur,
minimize such impact and ensure proper compensation for injury to
persons or damage to property caused by the effect of Petroleum
Operations; and

comply with the requirements of the law and reasonable requirements of SOC.

41.2

If Operator fails to comply with the provisions of Article 41.1 (a)(i) or contravenes any
relevant law relating to the environment, and such failure or contravention results in any
environmental damage, Operator shall forthwith take all necessary and reasonable
measures to remedy the failure and the effects thereof.

41.3

If SOC in its reasonable opinion believes that any works or installations erected by
Operator or any operations conducted by Operator are not in accordance with the law
and are damaging or may damage the environment, or are causing or may cause
pollution, SOC shall give notice to Contractor and Operator to promptly consider and
develop for JMC approval a remedial action plan and measures to mitigate such
damage within a reasonable period as may be agreed in the remedial action plan to
repair any such damage. If SOC deems it necessary, it may also require Operator to
suspend Petroleum Operations in whole or in part until Operator has commenced such
remedial measures or has repaired any damage caused.

41.4

The measures and methods to be used by Operator for the purpose of complying with
the terms of Article 41.1 (a)(i) shall be determined in timely consultation with SOC and
Contractor upon the commencement of Petroleum Operations by the FOD or later when
there is a significant change in the scope or method of conducting PetrOleum
Operations and shall take into account the international standards applicable in similar
circumstances and the relevant environmental impact study carried out in accordance
with Article 41.5. Contractor shall notify SOC and Operator, in writing, of the measures
and methods finally detennined by co:~ctor and approved in aCCOrdan~fth

/#

12 and shall cause such measures and methods to be reviewed from time to time in the
light of prevailing circumstances.
41.5

Contractor shall cause a person or persons with special knowledge on environmental
matters, to carry out two environmental impact studies in order:
(a)

to determine at the time of the studies the prevailing conditions relating to the
environment, human beings and local communities, the flora and fauna in the
Contract Area and in the adjoining or neighbouring areas; and

(b)

to establish the likely effect on the environment, human beings and local
communities, the flora and fauna in the Contract Area and in the adjoining or
neighbouring areas in consequence of the relevant phase of Petroleum
Operations, and to submit, for consideration by the Parties, methods and
measures contemplated in Article 41.4 for minimizing environmental damage and
carrying out site restoration activities.

41.6

The first of these environmental impact studies shall act as the baseline study for
purposes of Article 41.14 and shall be concluded promptly after the Effective Date but in
any event before commencement of any fieldwork by the FOD.

41.7

The second environmental impact study shall be submitted by Contractor as part of the
Enhanced Redevelopment Plan.

41.8

The studies mentioned in Article 41.5 above shall contain proposed environmental
guidelines to be followed in order to minimize environmental damage and shall include,
but not be limited to, the following, to the extent appropriate to the respective study
taking into account the phase of operations to which the study relates:
(a)

proposed access cutting;

(b)

clearing and timber salvage;

(c)

wildlife and habitat protection;

(d)

fuel storage and handling;

(e)

use of explosives;

(f)

camps and staging;

(g)

liquid and solid waste disposal;

(h)

cultural and archaeological sites;

(i)

selection of drilling sites;

(j)

terrain stabilization;

(k)

protection of freshwater horizons;

(I)

blow-out prevention plan;

(m)

flaring during completion and lesting of Gas and Crude Oil wells;

49

~

II/I

41.9

(n)

abandonment of wells;

(0)

rig dismantling and site completion;

(p)

reclamation for abandonment;

(q)

noise control;

(r)

debris disposal; and

(s)

protection of natural drainage and water flow.

Subject to the provisions of the Law on the protection of the environment, any new
project or expansion or modernization projects for Petroleum Operations for which a
proposal, other than a Plan, is submitted by Contractor, SOC shall consider the
assessment of the project and convey a decision with respect to environment clearance
within a period of ninety (90) days from the receipt of the requisite documents and data.
Subject to actual or pending receipt of the necessary environmental clearance, the ~IMC
shall decide upon the proposal of Contractor within thirty (30) days thereafter.

41.10 Contractor and/or Operator shall ensure that:
(a)

the pertinent completed results of the environmental impact studies are made
available to its employees and to Sub-Contractors to develop adequate and
proper awareness of the measures and methods of environmental protection to
be used in carrying out Petroleum Operations; and

(b)

the contracts entered into between Contractor and/or Operator and Sub­
Contractors relating to Petroleum Operations shall include the provisions
stipulated herein and any established measures and methods for the
implementation of Contractor's and Operator's obligations in relation to the
environment under this Contract.

41.11 Operator shall, in cooperation with Contractor, prior to conducting any drilling activities,
prepare and submit for review by SOC contingency plans for dealing with crude oil spills,
blowouts, fires, accidents and emergencies, designed to achieve rapid and effective
emergency response. The plans referred to above shall be discussed with SOC and
concerns expressed shall be taken into account.
(a)

In the event of an emergency, accident, oil spill or fire arising from Petroleum
Operations affecting the environment, Operator shall forthwith notify SOC and
Contractor and shall promptly implement the relevant contingency plan and
perform such site restoration as may be necessary in accordance with Best
International Petroleum Industry Practices.

(b)

In the event of any other emergency or accident arising from the Petroleum
Operations affecting the environment, Operator shall, in consultation with
Contractor, take such action as may be prudent and necessary in accordance
with Best International Petroleum Industry Practices.

41.12 In the event that Contractor and Operator fail to comply with any of the terms contained
in Article 41.11, SOC, after giving Contractor and Operator reasonable notice in the
circumslances, may lake any emergen: response action which may be n~sary~

s

ensure compliance with the terms of the relevant contingency plan and to recover from
Contractor, immediately after having taken such action, all costs and expenditures
incurred in connection with such action together with such interest as may be
determined in accordance with Annex C.
41.13 Where the Contract Area is partly located in areas forming part of formally designated
national parks, sanctuaries, mangroves, wetlands of national importance, biosphere
reserves and other biologically sensitive areas passage through these areas shall
generally not be permitted unless permitted by the Law. However, if there is no
passage, other than through these areas to reach a particular point beyond these areas,
permission of the appropriate authorities shall be obtained by SOC for the benefit of
Operator.
41.14 In accordance with Article 41.6, the environmental impact study shall act as the baseline
study to determine the obligations and liability of Contractor and Operator for the
environment which shall be limited to damage to the environment which:
(a)

occurs after the Effective Date and prior to the expiry or termination of this
Contract; and

(b)

results from an act or omission of Contractor or Operator.

41.15 Except for cases of Gross Negligence and Wilful Misconduct on the part of Contractor
and/or Operator, all costs incurred towards protection of or damage to the environment
shall be treated as Petroleum Costs.
41.16 Any costs approved by SOC and incurred by the Contractor in remediation of conditions
existing prior to the Effective Date and identified in the first study noted in Article 41.6
shall be considered Supplementary Costs.
41.17 In the event that Petroleum Operations are delayed, curtailed or prevented due to
extended delays in acquiring necessary environmental approvals, the Parties shall meet
and agree an appropriate extension of the Term together with all rights and obligations
hereunder, subject to the provisions of Article 8.
(End of Article 41)
ARTICLE 42 - SITE RESTORATION AND DECOMMISSIONING

42.1

On expiry or termination of this Contract or relinquishment of part of the Contract Area,
Contractor shall, sUbject to Article 5, remove all equipment and installations from the
relinquished area or former Contract Area in a manner agreed with SOC pursuant to an
abandonment plan.

42.2

Around mid-Term, Contractor shall prepare a proposal for JMC approval relating to site
restoration inclUding a decommissioning plan.
~;I

(End of Article 42)

51

~

jWr

ARTICLE 43 - GENERAL BUSINESS ETHICS
43.1

In the performance of this Contract, Contractor, Operator, SOC or any of their Affiliates
and every other person acting on their behalf ("Related Person") shall ensure that they
each strictly comply with general business ethics, the provisions of the United Nations
Convention against Corruption and any provision of any act, rule or regulation of the
laws of the country of incorporation of such entity or such entity's ultimate parent
company pertaining to anti-bribery, anti-corruption, anti-money laundering, the export or
import of technical data, restrictive trade practices regardless of their technical
applicability to the relevant person (the "Business Ethics Laws"). Contractor shall comply
with the Voluntary Principles on Security and Human Rights and SOC recognises this
and supports all such efforts to implement such Principles in connection with the
security protection of the Field provided in this Contract.

43.2

Contractor and Operator shall in their sUb-contracts stipulate their right to terminate the
sub-contracts with immediate effect in case of violation of the general business ethics or
Business Ethics Laws by Sub-Contractor or suppliers, and Contractor and/or Operator
shall terminate a sUb-contract in case of such a violation at their discretion or if SOC
requests Contractor or Operator to do so.

43.3

Neither Contractor, Operator, SOC nor their Related Persons shall, in relation to or in
the performance of this Contract, give or receive from any director, employee or agent
of the other or its Affiliates, any gift, entertainment or other benefit of more than minimal
cost or value or any commission, fee or rebate, and any hospitality shall be held within
reasonable limits.

43.4

Each of SOC and the entities constituting Contractor warrant that neither they nor any of
their Related Persons has taken or will take any action or failed to take or will fail to take
any action where such action or failure to act would result in a violation of any Business
Ethics Law by any Party and that none of them or their Related Persons have not made,
offered, or authorized, requested, received, or accepted and will not make, offer, or
authorize, request, receive, or accept with respect to the matters which are the subject
of or related to the signing of this Contract, any ancillary document related to this
Contract or any matter arising out or related to the Petroleum Operations, any payment,
gift, promise or other advantage, whether directly or indirectly through any other person
or entity, to or for the use or benefit of any public official (i.e. any person holding a
legislative, administrative or judicial office, including any person employed by or acting
on behalf of a public agency, a public enterprise or a public international organization) or
any political party or political party official or candidate for office, or any other person,
where such payment, gift, promise or advantage would violate (i) the Law; (ii) the laws of
the country of incorporation of such entity or such entity's ultimate parent company and
of the principal place of business of such ultimate parent company; or (iii) the principles
described in the Convention on Combating Bribery of Foreign Public Officials in
International Business Transactions, signed in Paris on December 17, 1997, which
entered into force on February 15, 1999. Each entity shall defend, indemnify and hold
the others harmless from and against any and all claims, damages, losses, penalties,
costs and expenses arising from or related to, any breach by such first entity of such
warranty. Such indemnity obligation shall survive termination or expiration of this

Contract.
(End of Article 43)

52

J.
V

4(/

/',

ANNEX A - DESCRIPTION OF CONTRACT AREA
The Contract Area is defined by the corner points numbered as shown for U.T.M. Zone 38N
and connected by straight lines as shown in Annex B.

CORNERPOINT

NORTHING

EASTING

A

3,407,000.000

733,107.000

B

3,369,290.000

730,070.000

C

3,333,000.201

744,839.961

0

3,332,982.218

744,030.681

E

3,332,962.366

743,134.105

F

3,332,947.252

742,449.288

G

3,332,922.660

741,330.885

H

3,332,895.025

740,067.881

I

3,332,883.586

739,543.127

J

3,332,870.522

738,942.406

K

3,332,847.213

737,866.875

L

3,332,818.919

736,554.702

M

3,332,812.138

736,239.135

N

3,332,789.456

735,180.527

0

3,332,771.157

734,322.961

P

3,332,756.035

733,611.950

Q

3,332,728.604

732,316.608

R

3,332,698.670

730,894.721

S

3,332,690.483

730,504.349

T

3,332,670.277

729,537.952

U

3,332,648.700

728,501.452

V

3,332,400.319

728,184.570

W

3,331,903.995

727,551.358

X

3,331,605.972

726,657.047

AA

3,347,378.000

717,116.000

CC
DO

3,361,650.000

714,500.000

3,407,000.000

714,500.000

EE

3,407,000.000

733,107.000

FF

3,400,000.000

732,535.000

54

(End of Annex A)

55

ANNEX B - MAP OF CONTRACT AREA
3410000

EE

DD

A

3400000

3390000

North
Rumaila
3380000

3370000
HHI+-------~

cc
3360000

South
Rumaila
3350000

,

3340000

3330000
710000

720000

740000

56

750000

jlJ1/

For the avoidance of doubt, the Parties agreed on the following:
1

2

The limits of the surface and subsurface Contract Area for the Mishrif formation in the
Rumaila Field end at coordinate 3400000 Northing UTM.
(a)

The limit of the subsurface Contract Area for the Zubair formation in
the Rumaila Contract Area at the coordinate 3407000 Northing UTM

(b)

The limit of the surface Contract Area for the Zubair formation in
Rumaila Contract Area will be at 3400000 Northing UTM.

For all other formations listed in the Developed Undiscovered paragraph in the
Contract (e.g. Yamama, Saa'di, etc.):
(a)

The limit for Rumaila Contract Area is at 3400000 Northing UTM.o3JI{:I
(End of Annex B)

57

//!t7
i

ANNEX C - ACCOUNTING PROCEDURE
This Annex C shall be attached to and made part of the Technical Service Contract of the
Rumaila Oil Field ("Contract"). Terms defined in the Contract shall have the same meanings for
the purpose of this Annex C.

ARTICLE 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
1.1

Definitions
Terms used in this Accounting Procedure shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this Contract. In addition:
"Material" shall mean and include any and all materials, equipment, machinery, articles
and supplies; and
"Operating Account" shall mean the account or set of accounts maintained by Contractor
and Operator to record Petroleum Costs and Supplementary Costs.

1.2

Purpose of Accounting Procedure
The purpose of this Accounting Procedure is to establish methods and rules of
accounting for Petroleum Operations.
Any procedure established herein may only be modified by mutual agreement of the
Parties.

1.3

Operating Account and Records
Contractor and Operator shall open and maintain all accounts and records necessary to
document in reasonable detail and in separate accounts the transactions relating to
Petroleum Operations, in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, all
in accordance with and subject to the provisions of this Contract.
(a)

The accounts and records shall show, among other things, the following:
(i)

(ii)

Costs of assets including:
1.

drilling in general and cost of each well;

2.

production facilities such as flow lines and degassing stations in
sufficient details;

3.

Crude Oil and Associated Gas Transportation Facilities;

4.

tank-farms and pumping stations; and

5.

infrastructure facilities and industrial centres.

Cost of Materials showing in detail the cost and quantity of each item.
The method of pricing should be stated.

58

(iii)

1.4

Operating Costs analysed by main items such as salaries, Materials and
services as defined or described in this Accounting Procedure.

(b)

Contractor's and Operator's books shall be kept in the Republic of Iraq in English
language (with Arabic language summary). All transactions shall be recorded in
Dollars, in accordance with the provisions of Article 20 of this Contract.

(c)

Accounts shall be kept according to the accounting system approved by the JMC
pursuant to Article 9.22(d) of this Contract.

(d)

Contractor and Operator shall maintain appropriate cost control records to meet
the requirements and obligations under this Contract.

(e)

Petroleum production, storage and transfer records shall be maintained
according to this Contract and consistent with Best International Petroleum
Industry Practices.

(f)

Expenditures shall be charged in Dollars as follows:
(i)

all Dollar Expenditures shall be charged in the amount incurred;

(ii)

for accounting purposes, all Dinar Expenditures shall be translated into
Dollars at the exchange rate prevailing on the date of the relevant
Expenditure in accordance with the regulations of the Central Bank of
Iraq;

(iii)

Expenditures in currencies other than Dollars or Dinars, shall be charged
in the equivalent amount in Dollars, using the actual exchange rate
applied by the relevant first class international bank on the date of
payment;

(iv)

a record shall be kept of the exchange rates actually used in converting
Dinars and other non-Dollar Expenditures into Dollars; and

(v)

on the date of each balance sheet, monetary items in currencies other
than Dollars shall be translated to Dollars at the rate of exchange
applicable on such balance sheet date.

Statements
(a)

Quarterly Statements
Contractor and Operator shall submit to SOC within forty five (45) days from the
end of each Quarter, a statement of Petroleum Costs and Supplementary Costs
together with reports and statement of the Operating Account of the said
Quarter.

(b)

Yearly Statements
Contractor and Operator shall submit to SOC within three (3) Months from the
last day of each Calendar Year, a statement of Petroleum Costs and
Supplementary Costs together with reports and statement of the Operating
Account of the said Calendar Year.
~y

V

59

'1.5

Audits
Yearly statements shall be supported by a report issued by an independent
auditor of international qualification appointed according to Article 20.4 of this
Contract. The auditor's report shall include a statement that the accounts and
statements are prepared according to the terms and conditions of this Contract
and this Accounting Procedure.
(End of Article 1)

ARTICLE 2 - OPERATING ACCOUNT
Subject to the provisions of this Contract, Article 19 of this Contract, and this Accounting
Procedure. Contractor shall charge the Operating Account with Service Fees and
Supplementary Fees. Petroleum Costs and Supplementary Costs shall start being charged as
from the Effective Date. while Remuneration Fees shall start being charged as from the Service
Fees Eligibility Date.
The Remuneration Fee per Barrel shall be computed pursuant to Article 19.5 of this Contract
and charged accordingly to the Operating Account. Petroleum Costs incurred inside or outside
the Republic of Iraq shall be prepared on a cash basis for cost recovery purposes and shall
include, but not be limited to, the following items unless such items would otherwise qualify as
Supplementary Costs:
2.1

Personnel
(a)

Operator's Locally Recruited Personnel
The actual cost of all of Operator's locally recruited personnel who are engaged
in Petroleum Operations shall be charged as Petroleum Costs. Such costs shall
include gross pay, all personnel benefits, employer contributions, taxes and other
assessments levied on Operator as an employer by Government authorities,
transportation and relocation costs of the personnel and such personnel's family
within the RepUblic of Iraq or elsewhere on temporary assignment in the interest
of Petroleum Operations (provided that no relocation costs for the personnel's
family shall be charged if the temporary assignment is for less than six (6)
consecutive Months) and such other costs that are statutory or customary for
Operator. This procedure shall also be applied with respect to personnel of SOC
seconded to Operator.

(b)

Assigned Personnel
The cost of the personnel of Contractor's Affiliates working in the Republic of Iraq
or in other countries (hereafter referred to as "Countries of Assignment") for
Petroleum Operations on a long-term assignment (more than six (6) consecutive
Months). The cost of these personnel shall be as per rates or actual cost as the
case may be, representing the Contractor's Affiliates actual cost which is
consistent with the standard employment policies of the head office Affiliate or of
other Affiliates employing such personnel.
These rates shall include all costs of salaries, wages, benefits, indemnities and
social charges according to laws, regulations or contractual agreements
60

~ A:I

applicable to such personnel. In addition, they shall include reimbursement of
personnel administrative charges according to the standard practice of
Contractor's Affiliates.
The charges for personnel assigned on a temporary basis (less than six (6)
consecutive Months) shall be made in accordance with Article 2.5(c) of this
AnnexC.
(c)

Personnel Engaged in Other Activities
If local personnel or assigned personnel are engaged in other activities in the
Republic of Iraq in addition to Petroleum Operations, the cost of such personnel
or assigned personnel shall be allocated on a time sheet or pro rata basis
according to sound and acceptable accounting principles.

(d)

Training Costs
All costs and expenses incurred by Contractor or Operator in organising, setting
up and conducting training activities for their Iraqi personnel engaged in
Petroleum Operations or Contractor's training activities under Addendum Three,
including the planning, designing, constructing, commissioning and running
training facilities and the related software.
All such training costs shall be subject to JMC prior approval.

2.2

Materials and Stock
The cost of Materials and stock purchased for or furnished to Petroleum Operations as
detailed under Article 4.1 of this Annex C hereinafter.

2.3

Transportation
(a)

Transportation of Personnel and Materials
Transportation of Materials necessary for the performance of Petroleum
Operations, including costs of packaging, brokerage, insurance and other related
costs. Personnel transportation costs, to the extent covered by the established
policy of Operator, shall include travel expenses for personnel and their
immediate families to and from the personnel's points of origin at the time
employment commences, at the time of final departure and for vacations, as well
as travel expenses in the Republic of Iraq for personnel and their immediate
families incurred as a result of transfers from one location to another, and travel
expenses relating to the periodical recuperation leaves of field personnel. Costs
related to immediate families shall be charged for personnel assigned to work in
the Republic of Iraq for periods exceeding six (6) consecutive Months.

(b)

Transportation Facilities
All costs and expenses for the Transportation Facilities according to Article 17.7
of this Contract and Addendum Two attached thereto.

2.4

Buildings and Equipment
(a)

Costs of buildings, equipment, furniture and fixtures and their maintenance and
61

Uv ~/

related costs and rents paid for all offices, houses, warehouses and other types
of buildings and costs of supplies necessary for the operation of such buildings
and facilities, all in the Republic of Iraq.

2.5

(b)

Costs of vehicles and their maintenance and operation.

(c)

Costs of computers and software and their maintenance and operation.

Services
The services required by Contractor or Operator for Petroleum Operations which may
include but are not limited to:
(a)

outside services of consultants, contract services, utilities and other services
procured from outside sources, rentals or compensation paid for the use of any
equipment and facilities;

(b)

use of equipment and facilities of Operator for Petroleum Operations on rental
basis at rates to be approved by the JMC;

(c)

all Specific Services performed under an assistance agreement between
Contactor and any Affiliate;
"Specific Services" shall mean services, activities, studies and projects of a
technical nature as well as computer services, carried out or procured by the
Affiliate at the Contractor or Operator's specific request under a purchase order
procedure, for the benefit of Petroleum Operations. Specific Services shall also
include studies and specific tasks such as, administrative, accounting, financial,
tax, legal or other services when requested by Contractor or Operator under a
purchase order; and
Specific Services shall be charged at cost in accordance with the tariffs and price
lists established each Year by the Affiliate and approved by the JMC for each
Calendar Year.

2.6

Damages and Losses
All costs or expenses necessary to replace or repair damages or losses incurred by fire,
flood, storm, theft, accident or any other cause not controllable by Contractor through
exercise of reasonable care and diligence in operations and not resulting from
Contractor's failure to timely file and diligently pursue claims against insurance
companies. Contractor shall furnish SOC with written notice with details of damages or
losses sustained in excess of ten thousand USD (US$10,OOO) per occurrence as soon
as practicable.

2.7

Legal Expenses
All costs and expenses of actual or potential litigation or arbitration or legal services
necessary or expedient for the protection of the Contract Area against third party claims,
including attorney's fees and expenses as hereinafter provided, together with all
judgements obtained against the Parties or any of them on account of Petroleum
Operations. and actual expenses incurred by Contractor and/or Operator and/or SOC in

securing evidence or expert advice for : : purpose of defending any s~ a c t i / }

pursued or urged in connection with operations under this Contract.
In the event actions or claims affecting the Parties' interests under this Contract shall be
handled by the legal staff of SOC in the Republic of Iraq, an agreed compensation
commensurate with cost of providing and furnishing such services shall be paid to SOC
and charged to the Operating Account.
2.8

Taxes
Pursuant to Article 23 and subject to other provisions of this Contract, taxes (other than
corporate income tax), levies, duties, imposts (if any) and/or charges and fees paid by
Contractor (but not previously paid directly by SOC) to Government authorities as
assessed or levied upon or in connection with Petroleum Operations.

2.9

2.10

Insurance and Claims
(a)

The premium of any insurance policy secured by Contractor or Operator
pursuant to this Contract.

(b)

Any costs sustained by Contractor or Operator arising out of an event covered by
insurance. Such costs include, but are not limited to, repairs and replacements of
Materials in the Contract Area resulting from damage or loss incurred because of
fire, flood, storm, theft, accident, or any other similar risk.

(c)

All costs and expenses associated with suing, working or travelling for, or any
other cost incurred in consequence of, or because of insurance related disputes,
claims or litigation with any party including any insurer and/or any insurer's
representatives or agents to the extent that such costs and expenses are not
refunded for whatever reasons, by insurance and/or not awarded by an arbitrator
or a court of law.

(d)

Any compensation received, or any claim collected from insurers or third parties
shall be credited to the Operating Account. If no insurance is carried for a
particular risk, all related actual expenditures incurred and paid by Contractor or
Operator in settling any and all losses, claims, damages, judgement and other
expenses, including related legal expenditures. Any such loss, claim or damage
shall be charged to the Operating Account unless otherwise provided for under
Article 24.7 of this Contract.

Currency Exchange
The gain or loss, if any, through currency translation or exchange pursuant to the
provisions of Article 21 of this Contract and Article 1.3(f) of this Accounting Procedure.

2.11

Tariffs
Subject to the provision of Article 3 of this Annex C, all sums paid to SOC inside or
outside the Contract Area, contractor(s) on petroleum fields outside the Contract Area,
or any third party in compensation for the use of facilities in connection with Petroleum
Operations such as, but not limited to, pipelines, hydrocarbon treatment plants and
storage facilities, on a basis of a muttJally agreed tariff.
~
~
;­

63

2.12

Surface Rights
All direct costs attributable to the acquisition, renewal or relinquishment of surface rights
acquired and maintained in force for Petroleum Operations in the Republic of Iraq.

2.13

Environment
All costs incurred for the protection, cleanup or restoration of the environment pursuant
to the Law or this Contract.

2.14

Administrative Overhead and General Expenses
The services of all personnel of Contractor's head office or its Affiliates not otherwise
chargeable, as well as the contribution of Contractor's head office or its Affiliates to
Petroleum Operations of an intangible nature and any overhead or its indirect cost
incurred by a Company's head office or its Affiliates shall be compensated by a charge
based on one percent (1%) of Petroleum Costs and Supplementary Costs (excluding the
signature bonus paid under Article 4 of the Contract) during each Calendar Year or a
fraction thereof.
The basis of applying this percentage shall be the total of Supplementary Costs
(excluding the signature bonus paid under Article 4 of the Contract) and Petroleum
Costs incurred in respect of Petroleum Operations and charged under this Accounting
Procedure to the Operating Account during each Financial Year or fraction thereof,
excluding administrative overhead as allowed in this section.
The above administrative overhead charges shall be paid i) while SOC is Operator 50%
to SOC and fifty (50)% to Companies, and ii) once FOD becomes Operator 100% to
Companies pursuant to Article 19 of this Contract.

2.15

To the extent any of the costs identified in Article 2 of this Annex C would qualify as
eligible costs pursuant to Articles 4, 7.4, 7.7(b) 10.4,10.7, 12.6, 17.6, or 41.16 of this
Contract, such costs shall be considered Supplementary Costs and not Petroleum
Costs.

2.16

All the other costs and expenses incurred in connection with and for the benefit of
Petroleum Operations shall, unless expressly excluded as Petroleum Costs, be
chargeable to Petroleum Costs.
(End of Article 2)

ARTICLE 3 -INFORMATION TO JMC AND SOC
Upon submitting the annual Work Program and Budget for approval in accordance with Article
12 of this Contract, Operator shall provide in writing the following details in respect of personnel,
Specific Services and tariffs in connection with Petroleum Operations to be charged during the
relevant Year.
3.1

Regarding Personnel Costs:
(a)

estimate of the overall amount thereof;

(b)

analysis and explanation of the applicable personnel policy and
64

pra~j/

Contractor or Operator and Contractor or Operator's Affiliates;

3.2

3.3

(c)

reasonable breakdown of the aforesaid Expenditures as per details stated in this
Accounting Procedure; and

(d)

rates and/or methods of apportionment of such costs.

Regarding Specific Services:
(a)

Estimate of the overall amount thereof;

(b)

Reasonable breakdown of such services by major type; and

(c)

Tariffs and rates expected to apply in respect to such services, especially to
assigned personnel.

Regarding Tariffs:
(a)

Estimate of the overall amount to be paid; and

(b)

Reasonable breakdown of the tariff expenditures.
(End of Article 3)

ARTICLE 4 - CHARGING PRINCIPLES

4.1

Purchases
(a)

All Materials purchased for Petroleum Operations shall be purchased at
competitive prices from reputable manufacturers or suppliers.
Materials purchased from third parties shall be charged at net cost paid by
Contractor after deduction of all discounts received. Net cost shall include but
not be limited to such items as transportation, insurance, licence fees and
purchasing and forwarding costs.

(b)

4.2

The Parties may furnish new Materials from their own stock provided that the
new Material transferred from the warehouses or other facilities of entities
constituting Contractor or their respective Affiliates, shall be priced at cost, and
provided that such cost is not higher than the price for new Material of the same
quality, obtained on comparable terms and conditions, prevailing in the
international market at the time such new Material was supplied to Contractor.

Direct and Indirect Costs
Costs shall be charged to the Operating Account using consistent methods from Year to
Year, and such methods shall be agreed upon by the Parties subject to the following
principles:
(a)

costs that may be directly charged to a relevant subdivision of the Operating
Account shall be so charged; and

(b)

costs that cannot easily be Cha:ed directly to any subdivision of ~ O~7

Account shall be apportioned either on a time basis or on a pro rata basis. Costs
of services that cannot be assessed accurately may be charged according to
standard rates and adjusted to actual costs at Year end.
4.3

Use of Equipment and Facilities Owned By Entities Constituting Contractor
For the use of any equipment or facilities that are wholly owned by entities constituting
Contractor, the Operating Account shall be charged a rental commensurate with the cost
of ownership.
The rental rates, which will not include any profit element, will be approved by the JMC
each Calendar Year. Such rates should be in line with those currently prevailing in the
area where Petroleum Operations are located for equipment and facilities comparable in
terms of availability, safety, efficiency and quality.
(End of Article 4)

ARTICLE 5 -INVENTORIES
At all times, Contractor shall maintain inventories of Materials at optimum levels required for
Petroleum Operations and shall be subject to:
5.1

Periodic Inventories, Notices and Representation
At reasonable intervals, and at least once annually, inventories shall be taken by
Contractor and Operator of the Materials charged to the Operatil1g Account, which shall
include all such Materials as are ordinarily considered controllable by operators in the
international petroleum industry. Written notice of intention to take inventory shall be
given by Contractor and Operator at least ninety (90) days before any inventory is to
begin so that SOC may be represented when any inventory is to be carried out.

5.2

Reconciliation and Adjustment of Inventories
Reconciliation of inventory with the Operating Account shall be made and a list of
overages and shortages shall be furnished to SOC. Inventory adjustments shall be made
by Contractor and Operator to the Operating Account if required; provided, however, that
any inventory adjustment exceeding a value of ten thousand USD (US$10,OOO) shall be
reported to SOC.

(End of Article 5)
ARTICLE 6 - DISPOSAL OF MATERIALS
Contractor and Operator shall inform the JMC and SOC of any excess or disposable Materials.
SOC shall instruct Operator on the action then required. Any proceeds of disposal of such
Materials shall be credited to the Operating Account.

(End of Article 6)
ARTICLE 7 - SUMS RECEIVED FROM THIRD PARTIES
All sums received by Contractor from any third party in compensation for the use of facilities
66

\;

#;1

utilized by Operator for Petroleum Operations shall be credited to the Operating Account.
(End of Article 7)

ARTICLE 8 - BASIS OF ACCOUNTING
The Operating Account may be maintained on an accrual basis, that is, costs shall be recorded
and entered in the Operating Account when the liability thereto first arises, and revenues shall
be recorded and entered in the Operating Account when the title thereto is acquired.
However, for the purposes of cost recovery as per Article 19 of this Contract, the relevant
calculations shall be made on a cash basis, that is, costs shall be considered only when paid
and revenues only when collected.
(End of Article 8)
ARTICLE 9 - PAYMENT OF SERVICE FEES AND SUPPLEMENTARY FEES
Contractor shall, pursuant to Article 19 of this Contract, render to SOC as promptly as practical
but not later than forty five (45) days after the end of the last Month of a Quarter, an invoice of
due and payable Service Fees and Supplementary Fees for the Quarter based on the Operating
Account and showing the following details:
9.1

Due Service Fees and Supplementary Fees brollght forward from the previous Quarter,
if any;

9.2

Service Fees and Supplementary Fees during Quarter;

9.3

Total Service Fees and Supplementary Fees for the Quarter (9.1 + 9.2);

9.4

Service Fees and Supplementary Fees received and/or quantity and value of Export Oil
lifted by Contractor for the Quarter according to the lifting procedure as referred to in
Addendum Four;

9.5

Amount of Service Fees and Supplementary Fees to be carried forward into the
succeeding Quarter if any (9.3 - 9.4), and

9.6

Excess, if any, of the value of Service Fees and Supplementary Fees received and/or
Export Oil lifted by Contractor over Service Fees and Supplementary Fees due for the
Quarter (9.4 - 9.3). Such excess shall be set off in the next calculation of Contractor's
outstanding Service Fees and Supplementary Fees payable in the immediately
succeeding Quarter in accordance with Article 19 of this Contract.
(End of Article 9)

ARTICLE 10- NON- RECOVERABLE COSTS
The following list of items shall be treated as non-recoverable costs for the purpose of cost
recovery:
10.1

Except for the period when SOC is Operator,_costs incurred as a result of any proven
Gross Negligence or Wilful Misconduct of Contractor/Operator including any amount

67

~ Ifl

paid in settlement of any claim alleging Gross Negligence or Wilful Misconduct whether
or not Gross Negligence or Wilful Misconduct is admitted or whether such sum is stated
to be paid on an ex-gratia or similar basis;
10.2

Any expenditure incurred directly or indirectly in connection with the raising of money to
finance Petroleum Operations and other incidental costs and charges related thereto by
whatever method raised; such expenditure includes, but is not limited to, interest,
commissions, fees and brokerage;

10.3

Any costs, charges or expenses including donations relating to public relations or
enhancement of Contractor's corporate image and interests, unless expressly approved
by the JMC and endorsed by SOC;

10.4

Any expenditure incurred which is not related to Petroleum Operations or on matters or
activities beyond the Delivery Point(s);

10.5

Corporate income tax;

10.6

Training, Technology and Scholarship Fund; and,

10.7

Any other expenditure which is stated elsewhere in this Contract to be non-recoverable
expenditure.

(End of Article 10)
ARTICLE 11- CONTROL STATEMENTS AND MAJOR ACCOUNTS

11.1

Contractor shall annually prepare, from the statements of expenditure prepared
pursuant to Article 1.4 of this Annex C a statement showing for the relevant Year the
excess or deficit in development expenditure compared to the Minimum Work
Obligations. Such statement shall be rendered to SOC not later than ninety (90) days
following the end of such Year.

11.2

For the purpose of classifying costs, expenses and expenditures for cost recovery and
Minimum Work Obligations, costs, expenses and expenditures shall be recorded in
major accounts inclUding Capital Cost and Operating Cost.

(End of Article 11)
ARTICLE 12 - TRANSFER PROCEDURE FOR THE OPERATING ACCOUNT

12.1

In accordance with this Contract, when the FOD becomes the Operator, the SOC shall
transfer to the FOD all the accounting records relating to the Operating Account.

12.2

In conducting the transfer of the books of account and inventory and check of all
properties in accordance with the provisions of this Accounting Procedure, the
implementation procedure for the transfer and verification, the accounting files to be
transferred and accounting matters to be settled as well as other details, shall be agreed
upon through consultation in advance between the SOC and the FOD. The transfer
procedure shall be completed within the period agreed upon by the Parties. Thereafter,

owing to the needs 01 any Party, FOD ::all allow such Party's staff acce~7 t h } J

of accounts within the relevant periods and provide them with duplicates of the relevant
accounting records, if necessary.
(End of Article 12)
ARTICLE 13 - EXTERNAL AUDITOR'S CERTIFICATE
Contractor shall provide SOC with a certificate from the external auditor of Lead Contractor's
head office evidencing that the charges and the rates applied pursuant to to Articles 2.1 (a) to
2.5(c) of this Annex C represent actual costs.
(End of Article 13)
(End of Annex C)

69

~

4/1

d
f/ 1'(

I

ANNEX D - DEFINITION OF RESERVOIRS

All depths quoted are in metres below Mean Sea Level.
SECTION 1 - PRODUCING RESERVOIRS
(i)

MISHRIF RESERVOIR
Interval from 2,140m to 2,297m in R-172 well and its lateral equivalents. Interval
from 2, 130m to 2,250m in Ru-94 well and its lateral equivalents.

(ii)

UPPER SHALE MEMBER RESERVOIR
Interval from 2,990m to 3,080m in R-172 well and its lateral equivalents. Interval
from 2,940m to 3,035m in Ru-94 well and its lateral equivalents.

(iii)

MAIN PAY RESERVOIR
Interval from 3,080m to 3,200m in R-172 well and its lateral equivalents.
Interval from 3,035m to 3, 150m in Ru - 94 well and its lateral equivalents.

(iv)

FOURTH PAY RESERVOIR
Interval from 3,163m to 3,362m in Ru-72 well and its lateral equivalents.

(v)

NAHR UMR
Interval from 2,638m to 2,912m in the R-193 well and its lateral equivalents.

SECTION 2 - DISCOVERED UNDEVELOPED RESERVOIRS
Lower Fars, Ratawi, Yamama, Sulaiy, Najma, Alan and Mus/Adaiya.
SECTION 3 - UNDISCOVERED POTENTIAL RESERVOIRS
All reservoirs which may exist below the base of the Mus/Adaiya Formations, and
previously drilled but unrecognised reservoirs

(End of Annex D)

70

ANNEX E - MINIMUM WORK OBLIGATION

SECTION 1 - ADDITIONAL APPRAISAL OPERATIONS
(a)

Acquire a 1,500 square kilometre 3-D seismic survey over the Contract Area,
including processing and interpretation thereof; and

(b)

Perform detailed geological and reservoir engineering studies, including 3-D
simulation for the reservoirs, and carry out detailed laboratory and reservoir
engineering studies to evaluate the most suitable recovery mechanism for all
producing and undeveloped reservoirs that will be the subject of the
Rehabilitation and Enhanced Redevelopment Plans. Integrate all relevant
available data and information, including such data existing prior to the execution
of Appraisal Operations.

SECTION 2 - REHABILITATION WORK
(a)

Drill 20 new production and 10 new injection wells;

(b)

Workover 130 wells, install new ESP's on 65 wells; perform 100 stimulations;

(c)

Agree and execute a thorough Reservoir Surveillance plan, to acquire sufficient
data for development planning and operations; expected to be in the order of
600-800 well integrity surveys PLTs, MDTs, RSTs, well production tests and PVT
measurements;

(d)

Design and build two 150,000 BWPD produced water re-injection plants (one
each for North and South Rumaila);

(e)

Rehabilitate the existing water intake plant and supply pipeline to achieve a
working capacity of 1.25 MMBWPD, or the maximum intake capacity notified by
SOC whichever is lower. SOC shall within six (6) Months after the Effective Date
advise Contractor of such maximum capacity for which they have received
consent from the competent authorities;

(f)

Refurbish existing or, as necessary, construct additional field gathering and
processing facilities required to process the expected production levels resulting
from implementation of the Rehabilitation Plan. To include an additional 3-phase
separator, expansion of power generation and distribution by an estimated 10-20
MW; 3 new flow tanks, with combined capacity of 30,000 cubic metres of oil;
provision of fiscal metering at the Production Measurement Points; and

(g)

Perform engineering studies for improved and enhanced production, and initiate
any studies necessary for preparation of the Enhanced Redevelopment Plan.
(End of Annex E)

71

1,;;fIJ1

ANNEX F - FORMS OF GUARANTEE
FORM I: FOR A COMPANY

To:
South Oil Company, ("South Oil Company or SOC")
We refer to the Technical Service Contract for the Rumaila Oil Field, (hereinafter referred to as
the "Contract") entered into on this day of
2009, between BP Iraq NV ("BP"), PetroChina
Company Limited ("PetroChina"), SOMa and SOC, an Iraqi State oil company.
In consideration of the rights and obligations of BP being a wholly-owned and controlled Affiliate
of BP Exploration Operating Company Limited ("BPEOC") and PetroChina being a controlled
Affiliate of China National Petroleum Corporation ("CNPC"), as a Party to this Contract, BPEOC,
a company dUly organized and existing under the laws of England and Wales and whose
registered office is at Chertsey Road, Sunbury on Thames, Middlesex, UK TW'16 7BP CNPC, a
company duly organized and existing under the laws of the People's Republic of China and
whose registered office is at No.9 Dongzhimen, Beidajie, Dongcheng District, Beijing, China
10007, hereby unconditionally and irrevocably undertakes, to make available or cause to be
made available to BP/PetroChina such technical and financial resources as may be required to
perform and fulfill its obligations under the Contract, as may be amended from time to time by
the Parties thereto, including payment to SOC of the balance (if any) of the Minimum
Expenditure Obligation in case of termination of the Contract, if applicable.
The obligations of BPEOC/CNPC hereunder shall be limited to the extent of the Participating
Interest held by BP/PetroChina under the Contract.
This Guarantee shall extend to any Affiliated assignee of BP/PetroChina which may become a
Party to this Contract.
This Guarantee is issued for the benefit of the SOC and cannot be assigned or transferred by it
to any other party without the prior written consent of BPEOC/CNPC.
For purposes of this Guarantee, the capitalised terms used herein but which are undefined shall
have the meaning ascribed to them in the Contract. A person who is not a party to this
Guarantee shall have no third party rights to enforce or enjoy the benefit of any terms of this
Guarantee.
This Guarantee shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of Republic of
Iraq. Any dispute arising from this Guarantee shall be settled in accordance with the terms of
Article 37 of the Contract.

{;

72

/,;1//

This Guarantee shall come into force on the Effective Date of the Contract and shall remain
valid as long as BP/PetroChina, or its Affiliate, shall be bound by the Contract.
Address for BPEOC for purposes of this Guarantee: Chertsey Road, Sunbury on Thames,
Middlesex, UK TW' 16 7BP, attention President.
Address for CNPC for purposes of this Guarantee: NO.9 Dongzhimen, Beidajie, Dongcheng
District, Beijing, China 10007, attention Company Secretary.

(';;J

Signed lor and on behalf of
(BPEOC) (CNPC)

73

:J I
'11

,/II!?

FORM 2: FOR SOC, TRANSPORTER, IRAQ OIL MARKETING COMPANY (SOMO), AND
STATE PARTNER
To:
BP Iraq NV ("BP"), and PetroChina Company Limited ("PetroChina")
We refer to the Technical Service Contract for the Rumaila Oil Field (hereinafter referred to as
the "Contract ") entered into on this day of
2009, between BP Iraq NV ("BP"), PetroChina
Company Limited ("PetroChina"), SOMa and South Oil Company (hereinafter referred to as
"SOC").
In consideration of
-the rights and obligations of SOC as a Party to this Contract and being fUlly owned
subsidiary of the Ministry of Oil of the Republic of Iraq.
-BP and PetroChina entering into the Contract
the Ministry of Oil, hereby unconditionally and irrevocably guarantees for the benefit of BP and
PetroChina to make available or cause to be made available to SOC such financial and
technical resources as may be required to perform and fulfil its obligations under the Contract,
as may be amended from time to time by the Parties thereto, for the Term of the Contract or as
extended to enforce rights or obligations in relation to the Contract.
This Guarantee shall unconditionally and irrevocably extend to the obligations of Oil Marketing
Company (SOMa), Transporter, the State Partner, and any Affiliate of SOC or the Ministry,
which becomes a Party to the Contract and any references in the Guarantee to 'SOC' shall be
construed accordingly.
This Guarantee shall come into force on the Effective Date of this Contract and shall remain
valid as long as SOC, Transporter, SOMa, State Partner, and any other Affiliate of SOC or the
Ministry, shall be bound by this Contract.
This Guarantee is issued for the benefit of BP and PetroChina and cannot be assigned or
transferred by it to any other party without the prior written consent of SOC.
For purposes of this Guarantee, the capitalised terms used herein but which are undefined shall
have the meaning ascribed to them in the Contract.
This Guarantee shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of Republic of
Iraq. Any dispute arising from this Guarantee shall be settled in accordance with the terms of
Article 37 of the Contract.

74

Address of the Ministry of Oil for purposes of enforcement of this Guarantee:
Petroleum Contract and Licensing Directorate, Ministry of Oil, Baghdad, Republic of Iraq,
attention Director General
Signed for and on behalf of Ministry of Oil
Name:
Title:

(End of Annex F)

75

ADDENDUM ONE - HEADS OF JOINT OPERATING AGREEMENT
This Addendum One is attached to and made part of the Technical Service Contract for the
Rumaila Oil Field ("Contract"). Terms defined in the Contract shall have the same meanings for
the purpose of this Heads of Agreement. The parties to the Joint Operating Agreement are the
Companies and the State Partner.

ARTICLE 1 - SCOPE
This Heads of Agreement is to provide for the basic principles to be included in a Joint
Operating Agreement ("JOA") to be executed among the Companies and the State Partner
(hereinafter referred to individually as "Participant" or collectively as "Participants").
(End of Article 1)

ARTICLE 2 - PARTICIPATING INTEREST
Each Participant shall have the undivided percentage interest specified under the Contract
and/or as agreed by the Participants ("Participating Interest") in the following proportions.
BP:

thirty eight percent (38%);

PetroChina:

thirty seven percent (37%);

SOMO: twenty-five percent (25%).
Each Participant's Participating Interest shall not be less than three point seven five percent
(3.75%). The Companies shall participate in proportion to their respective Participating Interest
in all costs, expenses and liabilities incurred pursuant to the Contract or JOA and shall own, in
the same proportion, the Contractor's rights under the Contract and the Participants' rights
under the JOA.
(End of Article 2)

ARTICLE 3 - LEAD CONTRACTOR
3.1

The Lead Contractor appointed in accordance with the Contract shall act for the
Participants.

3.2

The Lead Contractor may, at any time resign as such by giving the Participants notice in
writing. The Lead Contractor shall cease to be Lead Contractor if: (a) it dissolves,
liquidates or terminates its legal existence; (b) it becomes insolvent, bankrupt or is
placed in receivership; (c) its Participating Interest is reduced to less than twenty two
point five percent (22.5%); or (d) it takes no action within thirty (30) days after
notification to it by a Participant to remedy a material breach of the JOA. Pursuant to
Article 9.4 of this Contract, replacement of the Lead Contractor shall be subject to the
prior approval of the SOC.
(End of Article 3)

76

ARTICLE 4 - OPERATING COMMITTEE
4.1

An Operating Committee composed of representatives of the Participants shall be
established and shall act for the entire duration of JOA to make decisions and establish
joint policies and make proposals to be submitted to SOC or the JMC, as well as to
make any other decisions necessary or expedient for the orderly supervision and
direction of the Petroleum Operations.

4.2

The decisions of the Operating Committee on all matters shall be made by the
affirmative vote of the representatives of Participants having a combined voting right of
at least seventy percent (70%), each Participant being entitled to have and to exercise
through its representatives a voting right equal numerically to its Participating Interest.
Contractor's representation in the .IMC shall be allocated as follows, BP shall appoint
two (2) members, PetroChina two (2) members, and the State Partner one (1) member.
(End of Article 4)

ARTICLE 5 - WORK PROGRAMS AND BUDGETS
For each Calendar Year, the Lead Contractor shall prepare and submit to the Participants Work
Programs and Budgets not later than the first day of August of the preceding Year. Each such
Work Program and Budget shall set out in a reasonably detailed manner the work to be carried
out and shall include an itemized estimate of the corresponding expenditures. The Operating
Committee shall review and discuss the Work Program and BUdget submitted by Lead
Contractor for the following Calendar Year and shall adopt, not later than August 30, a Work
Program and Budget to be submitted to the Operator for further study and possible modification
before referring to the JMC pursuant to Article 12.2 of the Contract.
(End of Article 5)
ARTICLE 6 - COSTS AND EXPENSES
All costs and expenses of the Contractor for Petroleum Operations shall be borne by the
Companies in proportion to their respective Participating Interest. All costs and expenses that
are incurred in the conduct of operations under this JOA shall be determined and recorded
according to an accounting procedure (without prejudice to Annex C of the Contract), generally
accepted accounting practices used in the international petroleum industry and shall be subject
to periodic inspection and audit.
(End of Article 6)
ARTICLE 7 - DEFAULTS
7.1

Any Company that fails to pay when due its Participating Interest share of costs and
expenses shall be in default (hereinafter referred to as "DefaUlting Company"). The
Operator shall as soon as practicable notify all Participants of such default and the
Operator shall keep the Participants informed thereafter of material events in relation
thereto. The amount not paid by the DefaUlting Company shall bear interest from the
date due until fUlly paid. After any default has continued for thirty (30) days, the

77

/#

Defaulting Company shall not be entitled to attend Operating Committee meetings or to
vote on any matter coming before the Operating Committee during the period such
default continues. Non-Defaulting Companies shall pay the defaulted amount on behalf
of the Defaulting Company, in proportion to their Participating Interests or in any other
proportion they may agree upon.
7.2

The Defaulting Company shall have the right to remedy the default at any time prior to
forfeiture, as hereinafter provided, by payment in full to the Operator or, if the Non­
Defaulting Companies have paid any amounts under Article 7.1, to the Non-Defaulting
Companies, in proportion to the amounts so paid by them, of all amounts which the
Defaulting Company has failed to pay together with interest thereon on a day to day
basis at the rate of USOR plus five percent (5%) per annum.
th

If a Defaulting Company has not remedied the default by the thirtieth (30 ) day, then,
during the continuance of such default, the Defaulting Company shall not be entitled to
its Participating Interest share of Service Fees, which shall vest in and be the property of
the Non-Defaulting Companies. The Service Fees due to the Defaulting Company shall
proportionately be paid to the Non-Defaulting Companies, which Fees shall be credited
against all monies advanced by such Non-Defaulting Companies on behalf of the
Defaulting Company. The balance of such fees, if any, shall be paid to the Defaulting
Company when such default has been remedied.

7.3

State Partner shall be carried by the Companies for its Participating Interest share of
Petroleum Costs and Supplementary Costs. The amount so paid by the Companies on
behalf of State Partner shall be fully recovered by the Companies from the Petroleum
Costs and Supplementary Costs paid under the Contract.

(End of Article 7)
ARTICLE 8 - WITHDRAWAL
After the Minimum Work Obligation has been fulfilled, any Participant shall have the right to
elect. by giving notice to the other Participants. to withdraw from the Contract and the JOA.
Each of the other Participants may also give notice that it desires to withdraw from the Contract
and the JOA. Should all Participants give such notice of withdrawal, the Participants shall
proceed to abandon the Contract Area and terminate the Contract and JOA. If less than all of
the Participants give such notice of withdrawal, then the withdrawing Participants shall execute
and deliver all necessary instruments and documents to assign their Participating Interest to the
non-withdrawing Companies. without any compensation whatsoever. Such assignment to the
non-withdrawing Companies shall be in proportion to their Participating Interests, unless
otherwise agreed among them. The non-withdrawing Companies shall take the assignment of
all of the withdrawing Participants' Participating Interests; otherwise, all Participants shall be
deemed to have decided to withdraw from the Contract and the JOA.

(End of Article 8)
ARTICLE 9 - ASSIGNMENT
Each Participant may assign. subject to any requirement under the Contract, all or part of, its
Participating Interest to an Affiliate without the consent of the other Participants; provided that

76

'v

/1111

such Participant shall remain responsible for the performance of the financial and other
obligations under the Contract and the JOA to the same extent as if the transfer had not
occurred and provided further that the assigning Participant shall timely notify the other
Participants of any such assignment.
Without prejudice to the provisions of the Contract, no assignment of any interest under the
Contract and the JOA to third parties may be made by any Participant without the written
consent of the other Participants which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. The
assignment by a Participant of its interest under the Contract and the JOA to third parties shall
be subject to SOC's approval and its pre-emptive right and to the preferential rights of the other
Participants. The assignee shall be bound by the Contract and the JOA.
(End of Article 9)
ARTICLE 10 - RELATION OF THE PARTICIPANTS
The rights, duties, obligations and liabilities of the Participants under this Heads of Agreement
and the JOA shall be indiVidual, not joint or collective. It is not the intention of the Participants to
create, nor shall this Heads of Agreement or the JOA be deemed or construed to create a
mining or other partnership, joint venture, association or trust, or as authorizing any Participant
to act as an agent, servant or employee for any other Participant for any purpose whatsoever
except as explicitly set forth in the JOA.
(End of Article 10)

ARTICLE 11 - GOVERNING LAW AND ARBITRATION
The JOA shall be governed by, construed, interpreted and applied in accordance with the Law.
Any dispute, controversy or claim arising out of or in relation to or in connection with the JOA or
the operations carried out thereunder, including without limitation any dispute as to the validity,
interpretation, enforceability or breach of the JOA, shall be settled by arbitration in Paris, France
in accordance with the Rules of Conciliation and Arbitration of the International Chamber of
Commerce conducted in the manner contemplated in Article 37 of the Contract.
(End of Article 11)
ARTICLE 12 - EFFECTIVE DATE AND TERM
This Heads of Agreement shall come into force on the Effective Date and shall continue in
effect until the Contract terminates, or expires upon the Participants entering into the JOA,
whichever is the earlier.
(End of Article 12)
ARTICLE 13 - JOINT OPERATING AGREEMENT (JOA)
Within six (6) Months from the Effective Date, the Participants shall enter into the JOA which
shall embody the principles stipulated in this Heads of Agreement and it may include such other
provisions as customarily used by international petroleum industry and shall continue in effect
79

v/lll

as long as the Contract is in effect.
(End of Article 13)
(End of Addendum One)

80

ADDENDUM TWO - HEADS OF CRUDE OIL TRANSFER AGREEMENT
ARTICLE 1 - DEFINITIONS
This Addendum Two is attached to and made part of the Technical Service Contract for the
Rumaila Oil Field ("Contract"). Terms defined in the Contract shall have the same meanings for
the purpose of this Heads of Agreement. The parties to the Crude Oil Transfer Agreement are
the Contractor, SOC and Transporter.
(End of Article 1)
ARTICLE 2 - SCOPE
This Heads of Agreement prescribes the basic principles to be included in a Crude Oil Transfer
Agreement to be executed by and between the Contractor, Transporter and SOC for
transportation of Net Production from the Transfer Point to the Delivery Point.
(End of Article 2)
ARTICLE 3 - SCOPE OF CRUDE OIL TRANSFER AGREEMENT
Provided Operator complies with its obligations under the Contract and this Addendum related
to the Transportation System, Transporter, on behalf of SOC, shall receive from Operator on
behalf of Contractor at the Transfer Point the Net Production for transportation to the Delivery
Point.
(End of Article 3)
ARTICLE 4 - FACILITIES AT THE TRANSFER POINT
For the purpose of the transfer of Crude Oil, Operator may use a parcel of land at the Transfer
Point and construct necessary facilities thereon.
(End of Article 4)
ARTICLE 5 - TRANSFER RATE
Operator on behalf of Contractor shall have the right and the obligation to tender Crude Oil at
the Transfer Point at a certain average rate as per the current approved production schedule for
the Contract Area based on the approved Rehabilitation or Enhanced Redevelopment Plan.
However, Operator in co-ordination with Transporter may transfer Crude Oil at a peak rate up to
twenty percent (20%) above the approved average rate for temporary periods to compensate
for any operational constraints. In the event that the throughput capacity of the pipeline system
or the related facilities is constrained for unforeseeable incidents beyond the control of the
Transporter and that the throughput of the pipeline system is consequently restricted, Operator
shall reduce its deliveries accordingly. Any such reduction shall be on a non-discriminatory
basis.
(End of Article 5)

61

AR1"ICLE 6 - TRANSFER CONDITIONS
Crude Oil shall be transferred at the Transfer Point from one or more Crude Oil quality streams
in accordance with the approved Rehabilitation or Enhanced Redevelopment Plan, and at the
pressure commensurate with the pressure required by the Transportation System. The quality
of each Crude Oil stream transferred at the Transfer Point shall be subject to certain conditions
and specifications to be agreed upon by Transporter and Operator on behalf of Contractor.
Operator on behalf of Contractor shall not mix any additives with the Crude Oil tendered for
transportation, without prior written approval of Transporter.
(End of Article 6)

ARTICLE 7 - MEASURING
Operator shall install, maintain and operate all facilities necessary for the measurement of
Crude Oil at each Production Measurement Point. Operator shall notify SOC and Contractor
prior to any calibration of such measurement facilities and allow SOC's and Contractor's
representatives to attend such calibration activities. Unless agreed otherwise by the Parties, any
inaccuracy determined during such calibration activities shall be deemed to have existed since
the mid-point between the last calibration and the current calibration. Similarly, Export Oil that
may be lifted by a Contractor shall be measured at the Delivery Measurement Point in
accordance with standard SOMO measurement practices.
Operation and calibration of the metering equipment and procedures for measurement and
sampling shall be in accordance with Best International Petroleum Industry Practices. The
Parties shall agree the procedure(s) for measuring the volume and quality of Crude Oil and
Export Oil , the Parties' right of (i) access to the Production and Delivery Measurement Points
and (ii)witnessing calibration and testing of such Points.
(End of Article 7)

ARTICLE 8 - TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM
8.1

Unless related to obligations under Annex E, Contractor shall have no obligation to build
Transportation Facilities downstream of the Transfer Point unless this is agreed and
incorporated in the Rehabilitation and/or Enhanced Redevelopment Plan. In the event
such facilities are built, they shall be handed over to Transporter upon completion and
commissioning.

8.2

In case a need arises to de-bottleneck, improve the efficiency and/or to increase the
capacity of the Transportation System, SOC, Transporter or Contractor may propose to
construct facilities beyond the Transfer Point, in addition to or to modify the existing
Transportation Facilities. Contractor and Operator may participate in the building and
financing of the same in proportion to the production from the Contract Area in relation
with other users and such participation shall be considered Supplementary Costs.

8.3

In the event that Contractor agrees to finance and build or improve such Transportation
Facilities, Operator shall ensure the participation of Transporter's representatives during
engineering and construction of the Transportation Facilities, as well as the training of
Transporter's personnel concerning operation and maintenance to be conducted before

62

~ ~~

handing Transportation Facilities over to Transporter. Operator shall provide Transporter
with all documents and standard warranties provided by manufacturers relating to the
said Facilities. Operator, on behalf of Contractor. and Transporter shall agree in advance
on a procedure for smooth hand-over of the Transportation Facilities after completion
and commissioning.
(End of Article 8)
ARTICLE 9 - EFFECTIVE DATE AND TERM
This Heads of Agreement shall be valid and effective as from the Effective Date of the Contract
and shall continue in effect until the expiry or termination of the Contract or upon the Contactor,
SOC and Transporter entering into the Crude Oil Transfer Agreement, whichever is the earlier.
(End of Article 9)
ARTICLE 10 - GOVERNING LAW AND ARBITRATION
The Crude Oil Transfer Agreement shall be governed by, construed, interpreted and applied in
accordance with the Law. Any dispute, controversy or claim arising out of or in relation to or in
connection with the Crude Oil Transfer Agreement or the operations carried out thereunder,
inclUding without limitation any dispute as to the validity, interpretation, enforceability or breach
of the Crude Oil Transfer Agreement, shall be settled by arbitration in accordance with the
procedures set forth in Article 37 of the Contract.
(End of Article 10)
ARTICLE 11 - RELATED PROCEDURES
Procedures existing on the Effective Date for lifting, storage, tanker nomination and other
related activities may later be adjusted to support the efficient implementation of the Export Oil
Sales Agreement.
(End of Article 11)
ARTICLE 12 - TRANSPORTATION AGREEMENT
Within six (6) Months from the Effective Date, the Contractor shall enter into the Crude Oil
Transfer Agreement with SOC and Transporter which shall embody the principles in this Heads
of Agreement and it may include such other provisions as customarily used by international
petroleum industry and shall continue in effect as long as the Contract is in effect.
(End of Article 12)
ARTICLE 13- WAIVER OF SOVERIGN IMMUNITY
It is understood that the rights and obligations under the Contract constitute commercial rather
than sovereign rights or obligations and therefore no Party shall have the right to claim, and

83

~ ~/

hereby waives any, immunity from legal proceedings or judgement enforcement in this respect.

(End of Article 13)

(End of Addendum Two)

84

pIP

ADDENDUM THREE - HEADS OF AGREEMENT FOR ESTABLISHMENT OF THE
FIELD OPERATING DIVISION (FOD)

This Addendum Three is attached to and made part of the Technical Service Contract for the
Rumaila Oil Field ("Contract") (FOD). Terms defined in the Contract shall have the same
meanings for the purposes of this Heads of Agreement. The parties to the full agreement shall
be the Parties to the Contract: SOC and Contractor.
ARTICLE 1- ESTABLISHING OF THE FIELD OPERATING DIVISION

1.1

Pursuant to Article 9 of the Contract, SOC and Contractor shall set up a non­
incorporated joint operating entity. FOD shall have all the necessary authorities to
enable it to discharge its duties in this regard. In accordance with the authorities of the
~IMC as set out in Article 13.2 Contractor shall supervise, direct and manage all the
planning, decisions, surveillance. and day to day conduct of Petroleum Operations by
the FOD. Contractor shall act for and on behalf of the FOD to allow the FOD to perform
its role under the terms of the Contract and for those purposes shall contract with and
represent the FOD before all persons and entities including but not limited to , Sub
Contractors, vendors or service providers and other third parties. The FOD shall be
established promptly after the Effective Date, but shall fUlly take over the conduct of
Petroleum Operations within twelve (12) Months from the Effective Date. The
establishment of the FOD shall in no way relieve Contractor of its obligations to achieve
the production targets under the Contract.

1.2

FOD shall conduct its activities in accordance with the provisions of the Contract, this
Addendum Three and such agreements as may be entered into in the future by the
parties to this Addendum Three.

1.3

Contractor and SOC shall agree, at least three (3) Months prior to FOD taking over
operatorship, on the procedure to secure a smooth transfer of Petroleum Operations
from SOC to FOD.
(End of Article 1)

ARTICLE 2- FOD NAME

The name of FOD shall be the Rumaila Field Operating Organisation.
(End of Article 2)
ARTICLE 3 - HEADQUARTERS OF FOD

The FOD shall have its own head office distinct from that of SOC, Contractor, and Companies.
(End of Article 3)

85

q,; ;/!/j

IARTICLE 4 - FOD OBJECTIVES

4 .1

FOD shall assume the authorities and duties of the Operator, and shall conduct
Petroleum Operations on behalf of the Parties, and to the account of Contractor, all in
accordance with the provisions of the Contract and this Addendum Three.

4.2

FOD shall implement approved Development Plans, Work Programs and Budgets in
accordance with the Contract. FOD shall keep account of all costs, expenses and
expenditures for such Petroleum Operations under the terms of the Contract and Annex
C attached thereto.

4.3

In conducting Petroleum Operations, FOD and Sub-Contractors shall comply with the
Law.

1

(End of Article 4)
ARTICLE 5 - ROLE OF CONTRACTOR
After the FOD has taken over conduct of Petroleum Operations and has become Operator,
Contractor shall in accordance with the authorities of the JMC as set out in Article 13.2 of the
Contract supervise, direct and manage all the planning, decisions, surveillance, and day-to-day
conduct of Petroleum Operations by the FOD, as set forth in more detail in this Article 5. In
general, Contractor shall make available appropriate managerial and technological skills and
personnel to the FOD with a view to ensuring that Petroleum Operations can be performed in
accordance with Best International PetrOleum Industry Practices. The role of Contractor with
respect to Petroleum Operations shall include the following:
5.1

preparing the Rehabilitation Plan, the Enhanced Redevelopment Plan, and all Revisions,
as well as Work Programs and Budgets and their Revisions;

5.2

supporting FOD in the implementation of Plans and Work Programs;

5.3

supporting FOD in connection with the use of advanced technology prOVided by
Contractor in connection with Petroleum Operations, including where appropriate
providing necessary technical experts, and field supervisors, and providing training to
Operator with a view to allowing FOD to take the greatest responsibility practicable for
the day-to-day conduct of such activities;

5.4

supporting FOD with respect to the organization of Engineering, Procurement,
Installation and Construction procedures, including the establishment of contracting
procedures in accordance with Best International Petroleum Industry Practices and
relevant Laws and regulations of the Republic of Iraq;

5.5

supporting FOD in connection with financial and accounting matters, including the
organization of financing for Petroleum Operations and the negotiation of appropriate
financing documentation; the implementation of internal control and financial reporting
systems sufficient to allow compliance with the requirements of the Contract and
applicable Laws of the Republic of Iraq; the negotiation of engagement arrangements
with external auditors (SUbject to approval by the JMC) including the determination of the
scope of work and remuneration of such auditors;

5.6

providing necessary administrative support with respect to the organization of activities

66

V~I'

of the JMC, including assistance in establishing operating procedures for meetings and
written consents of the JMC members, assistance in preparing reports and
presentations for the JMC, establishment of administrative support services for the JMC
(maintenance of minute books, payment of reasonable expenses relating to meetings,
furnishing of documents and information prior to JMC meetings);
5.7

providing such additional support as may be reasonably required in order to allow
Petroleum Operations to be conducted in accordance with Best International Petroleum
Industry Practices, and as may be approved or requested by the JMC; and

5.8

Contractor shall provide the foregoing services and support either by making personnel
with relevant managerial, technical or financial expertise available to FaD, or by
providing such services and support directly, or through an Affiliate, as determined by
the ~IMC.
(End of Article 5)

ARTICLE 6 - FINANCING
FaD shall have neither profit nor loss. Costs, expenses and expenditures, incurred and paid by
FaD to carry out Petroleum Operations, shall be financed and recovered by Contractor as
Petroleum Costs or Supplementary Costs according to the annual Work Program and Budget
approved by the JMC in accordance with the provisions of the Contract.
(End of Article 6)

ARTICLE 7- FUNCTION OF FOD
FaD shall not own any right, title or interest under the Contract or in the Petroleum produced
from the Contract Area. FaD shall function as Operator and shall assume all relevant
responsibilities of Operator under this Contract.
(End of Article 7)

ARTICLE 8- JOINT MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE
A JMC shall be formed pursuant to Article 13 of this Contract for the purpose of overall
supervision and control of Petroleum Operations. In addition to the authorities and duties set
forth in Article 13.2 of the Contract, following the establishment of FaD, the JMC shall have the
follOWing duties and authorities:
8.1

general supervision and control of the conduct of Petroleum Operations by FaD in
accordance with the authorities set out in Article 13.2 of the Contract;

8.2

the establishment of the operating organisation and procedure;

8.3

the structuring of the accounting system and of the financial controls as well as the
financial planning insofar as it is necessary to manage FaD;

8.4

the establishment of the procedures for the funding of Petroleum

67

:;;rationS'1!1

Contractor;
8.5

the appointment and replacement of the General Manager, the Deputy General
Manager and the other senior divisional managers of FOD, and the definition of their
respective powers, subject to the approval of SOC which shall not be unreasonably
withheld;

8.6

the establishment and update of the organisation chart of FOD, including the
identification of the positions to be filled through secondment from SOC or Contractor,
respectively, and those to be filled through direct employment or on a contractual basis.
The Contractor should be prepared to fill positions within the FOD as and where
required upon the request of the JMC, provided however that the Companies shall have
the right to fill up to 15% of the positions with secondees from Contractor, the remaining
85% shall be filled by SOC secondees and/or directly recruited through the FOD;

8.7

establishment of the employment procedures and personnel regulations of FOD; and

8.8

prior approval of the terms of the service or secondment agreements to be entered into
by FOD with SOC and Contractor.
(End of Article 8)

ARTICLE 9 - MANAGEMENT
During its first two years of operation the FOD shall be managed by Joint General Managers,
one appointed by each of the Lead Contractor and the SOC. Thereafter, management of the
FOD shall be through a General Manager and Deputy General Manager, nominated initially by
the Contractor and SOC respectively, with the nomination rights alternating every two (2) years.
Departmental Managers of FOD shall be appointed by the Joint General Managers or thereafter
by the General Manager and Deputy General Manager after the first two (2) years. The General
Manager shall be the chief executive officer of the FOD. The General Manager(s) shall consult
with, recommend to and agree with the ~IMC the most efficient way to organise the FOD.
(End of Article 9)
ARTICLE 10- EMPLOYMENT REGULATIONS
FOD shall give preference to Iraqi personnel in accordance with Article 9 of the Contract.
Secondees of Contractor or SOC shall be exclusive to the operations of the FOD and shall
have no other work obligation or assignment within the organization supplying such secondee,
unless agreed by SOC and Lead Contractor.
The ~'MC shall approve the regulations covering the terms and conditions of employment of the
personnel of FOD employed directly by FOD.
(End of Article 10)
ARTICLE 11 - LIABILITY
Liabilities shall be pursuant to the Contract.
88

(End of Article 11)
ARTICLE 12 - DURATION OF FOD
The minimum duration of FOD shall extend up to the end of the Term, including any extensions
thereof.
(End of Article 12)
ARTICLE 13 - FULL AGREEMENT ON THE FOD
Pending the conclusion by the Parties of the full agreement, these Heads of Agreement setting
forth the principal terms of the agreement shall apply.
(End of Article 13)
ARTICLE 14 - HAND-OVER OF OPERATORSHIP
Operatorship including all books and records shall be transferred to FOD.
(End of Article 14)
ARTICLE 15 - GOVERNING LAW AND ARBITRATION
The Law shall apply to FOD, if and to the same extent they apply to Contractor, SOC and/or the
Contract in accordance with Article 29. The FOD agreement shall be governed by, and
construed in accordance with, the Law. Any dispute arising from or in connection with the FOD
agreement shall be settled in accordance with Article 37 of the Contract.
(End of Article 15)
ARTICLE 16 - CONFIDENTIALITY
Confidentiality provisions of Article 33 of the Contract shall apply for these Heads of
Agreement, subsequent full agreement and operations of FOD.
(End of Article 16)
ARTICLE 17 - EFFECTIVE DATE AND TERM
These Heads of Agreement shall come into force on the Effective Date and shall continue in
effect until the earlier of Contract expiry, Contract termination or upon the full FOD agreement
taking effect. The full FOD Agreement shall be entered into no later than six (6) Months from
the Effective Date.
(End of Article 17)
(End of Addendum Three)

89

I

ADDENDUM FOUR - HEADS OF EXPORT OIL SALES AGREEMENT

~hiS Addendum Four is attached to and made part of the Technical Service Contract of Rumaila

Oil Field ("Contract"). Terms defined in the Contract shall have the same meanings for the
[purpose of this Heads of Agreement. The parties to the Export Oil Sales Agreement are Iraq Oil
Marketing Company (SOMa), SOC and Contractor.

SPECIAL TERMS (PART 1)
.ARTICLE 1 - DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this Heads of Agreement, terms defined in these Heads of Agreement shall
have the same meanings except for the definition of the Parties:
"Parties" means Seller and Buyer.
"Buyer" means Contractor.
"Seller" means Oil Marketing Company "SOMa", on behalf and for the account of SOC.
"SOC" means South Oil Company.
(End of Article 1)

ARTICLE 2 - QUANTITY
2.1

Forward Quantity Statement
No later than the first day of the first Month of the Quarter immediately preceding any
Lifting Quarter, Contractor shall invoice SOC the outstanding Service Fees and
Supplementary Fees due and payable to Contractor under the Contract as these will
stand on the last day of the said Lifting Quarter. SOC shall review the invoice and will
either confirm its accuracy, or advise Contractor of any errors. The invoice shall be
agreed by Contractor and SOC the 15th of said first Month.
Accordingly, no later than the first day of the second Month of the Quarter immediately
preceding any Lifting Quarter, the Buyer shall furnish to the Seller a statement of the
volume of Export Oil to be lifted from each standard export quality in each Month of the
said Lifting Quarter ("Forward Quantity Statement"). The Forward Quantity Statement
shall be based on the Service Fees and Supplementary Fees due and payable to
Contractor as agreed by SOC, divided by the Provisional Export Oil Price. However, the
volume of Export Oil to be lifted by Contractor in any Lifting Quarter shall not exceed the
upper limit set for payment of due Service Fees and Supplementary Fees. and the
balance of such Service Fees and Supplementary Fees, at the end of the said Lifting
Quarter, shall be carried forward, all pursuant to Article 19 of the Contract and the
AnnexC.
SOC shall review the Forward Quantity Statement, and will no later than the last day of
the Month of the preceding Lifting Quarter either confirm its accuracy. or advise

Contractor of any errors in the caleul::on of the volumes to be lifted. ~ nomi~/

quantity agreed for each Month may be varied by up to pius or minus five percent (5%)
as operational tolerance at the time of actual loading. Actual quantity lifted is based on
net bill of lading.
For smooth and timely lifting and reporting under these Heads of Agreement, the Parties
may establish a specialized "Joint Committee" with representatives from SOC,
Contractor, and SOMO.
2.2

Lifting Statement
The Seller shall furnish to the Buyer and the Joint Committee a statement setting out the
actual Barrels of the Export Oil lifted per Month during a Lifting Quarter and the actual
Price for the Month of lifting ("Lifting Statement"), within thirty (30) days after the end of
each Lifting Quarter. The Buyer shall review the Lifting Statement, and will advise the
Seller of any errors in the calculations contained therein, within fifteen (15) days after
receipt of the Lifting Statement, with a copy to the Joint Committee. Notwithstanding the
above, it is agreed that the final certified shipping documents shall be controlling as to
volumes lifted. Attachment A to these Heads of Agreement contains a sample schedule
of notifications, lifting and adjustments applicable for lifting during a Year.

2.3

Option to Deliver Excess Volumes
The Parties may, at their option, elect to lift excess Export Oil over and above the offset
volumes required in any Lifting Quarter under the Contract. The actual value of any such
excess Export Oil lifted by the Buyer under the price Article hereunder will reduce the
outstanding balance of due Service Fees and Supplementary Fees under the Contract,
as reflected in the then most current Quarterly report. If either of the Parties wish to
exercise this option to deliver excess Export Oil in any Lifting Quarter, it must notify the
other Party of such election no later than the first day of the second Month of the
preceding Quarter and the other Party must confirm its agreement no later than ten (10)
days after such notice.
(End of Article 2)

AR1"ICLE 3 - DELIVERY
FOB relevant Iraqi loading terminal or any other terminal as may be agreed by the Parties.
(End of Article 3)

ARTICLE 4 - EFFECTIVE DATE AND TERM
These Heads of Agreement shall come into effect from the Effective Date and shall continue in

effect until the Contrael terminates or the Parties and SOC enter into the Export Oil S.'~

J

Agreement whichever is earlier.
(End of Article 4)

91

IV

~/

<­

ARTICLE 5 - PRICE
Export Oil Price shall be determined pursuant to Article 18 of the Contract.
(End of Article 5)
ARTICLE 6 - PAYMENT
The Proceeds receivable by the Seller under these Heads of Agreement shall be used to
reduce the amounts owed to the Buyer by SOC under the Contract and, therefore, no payments
to the Seller are required for such Export Oil deliveries. The Buyer shall not be required to pay
the Seller nor post letters of credit or other guarantees of payment, relative to such deliveries,
except for deliveries in excess of the amounts owed to the Buyer under the Contract.
(End of Article 6)
ARTICLE 7- COMPLIANCE WITH LAWS
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, nothing in this Heads of Agreement is
intended, and nothing herein should be interpreted or construed, to induce or require either
Party or SOC hereto to act in any manner which is not in compliance with the Law.
(End of Article 7)
ARTICLE 8- SOVEREIGN IMMUNITY
It is understood that the rights and obligations under the Contract constitute commercial rather
than sovereign rights or obligations and therefore no Party shall have the right to claim, and
hereby waives any, immunity from legal proceedings or judgement enforcement in this respect.

(End of Article 8)
ARTICLE 9 - EXPORT OIL SALES AGREEMENT
Contractor, SOC and SOMa shall in due time enter into the Export Oil Sales Agreement which
shall embody the principles set out in this Heads of Agreement, the Contract and it may include
such other provisions as customarily used by international petroleum industry and shall
continue in effect for the Term of the Contract. Pending the execution of the Export Oil Sales
Agreement, the provisions of this Heads of Agreement shall apply.
(End of Article 9)

ARTICLE 10- GENERAL TERMS AND CONDITIONS (PART 2)
All other terms and conditions in Seller's General and Special Terms and Conditions for Export
Oil Sale/Purchase Contract dated 17 June 2009 ref No. MKl09/23 ("GTC") apply, except as
amended by the special conditions here-above and excluding the commercial term;#-.4
contemplated in such GTC.
~/(

P

92

~

v

Any provisions in Seller's GTC which allow the Seller to suspend delivery of Export Oil under
these Heads of Agreement or the subsequent Export Oil Sales Agreement shall act only to
cancel affected lifting which will be rescheduled by mutual agreement. The arbitration
provisions (Article 37) and general business ethics (Article 43) of the Contract shall apply

mutatis mutandis.
(End of Article 10)

Attachment A to Addendum Four- Export Oil Lifting and Reporting
Export Oil Lifting and Reporting
(Assuming first lifting in January)
Quarter
preceding
First
Lifting
Quarter

Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
Jan.

First Lifting
Quarter

Feb.
Mar.
Apr.

Second
Lifting
Quarter

May
June

July
Third
Lifting
Quarter

Aug.
Sep.

Quarterly Service Fees and Supplementary Fees
Reports agreed (for next Quarter)
Forward Quantity Statement for First Lifting Quarter
(Price = October orice)
January crude nomination (acceptance of all Month
nominations by 20 1h )
February crude nomination
Quarterly Service Fees Report agreed
Forward Quantity Statement, for Second Lifting Quarter
(Price=January price)
March crude nomination
April crude nomination
May crude nomination
Lifting Statement and Quarterly Service Fees and
Supplementary Fees Report agreed (Adjustment made
for First Quarter actuals)
Forward Quantity Statement (For Third Quarter)
(Price = April price)
June crude nomination
July crude nomination
August crude nomination
Lifting Statement and Quarterly Service Fees and
Supplementary Fees Report agreed (Adjustment made
for Second Quarter actuals)
Forward Quantity Statement ( For Fourth Quarter)
(Price = July price)
September crude nomination
October crude nomination

93

No
Later
Than
th

15

151
th

10

th

10
th
15
151
th
10
th

10

th

10
th
15
51

1
th
10
th

10

th

10
15th
51

1
th
10
10th

Oct.
Fourth
Lifting
Quarter

Nov.

November crude nomination
Lifting Statement and Quarterly Service Fees and
Supplementary Fees Report agreed
(Adiustment made for Third Quarter actuals)
Forward Quantity Statement ( For next Quarter)
(Price = October price)
December crude nomination

Dec.

January crude nomination
(End of Addendum Four)

94

10

th

th

15

1st
10th
10

th

